30/9/2014 Re: Will ultrasound scanners replace the stethoscope? | The BMJ
http://www.bmj.com/content/348/bmj.g3463/rr/700464 1/2
This site uses cookies. More info Close By continuing to browse the site you are agreeing to our use
of cookies. Find out more here Close
Feature Ultrasonography
Will ultrasound scanners replace the
stethoscope?
BMJ 2014; 348 doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.g3463 (Published 29 May 2014) Cite this as: BMJ
2014;348:g3463
Article
Related content
Article metrics
Rapid responses
Response
Re: Will ultrasound scanners replace the stethoscope?
Though I greatly welcome Marc Wittenberg’s article “Will ultrasound scanners replace the stethoscope?”, I
find it frustrating to see that as ultrasound technology races forward we seem to still be wrestling with
many of the same questions highlighted years ago. Compare, for example, BMJ’s 2008 article by Wise in
which fundamental questions of who should be able to use diagnostic ultrasound imaging, where, and for
what purpose(s) were similarly highlighted. 1
If ultrasound really is to become the future stethoscope as claimed time and again, training therein needs
to start much earlier than as a simple optional add-on after qualification. Many an educator will doubtlessly
protest that there is no room in overcrowded medical school curricula to include additional subjects such
as ultrasound physics, theory, and image interpretation. However, we already have examples of where
ultrasound is already used to augment anatomy lessons or are forming a core part of training medical
students.2, 3 I am interested in seeing to what degree these efforts have an impact on further roll-out of
this increasingly portable and affordable technology and, more importantly, how this might impact patient
care.
The challenges of collectively improving ultrasound training and maintaining competence therein, neatly
summarised by Edwards, seem to have progressed little over the years. 4 Indeed, the key issue of
capacity and/or willingness of hospital Radiology Departments to support training of other specialties
highlighted as early as 1997 is unlikely to have improved whilst radiology departments continue to
struggle with increasing workloads.5 Moreover, as more emphasis is placed on introducing market forces
into healthcare, there may be a significant financial disincentive for some to support such training if doing
so is likely to result in decreased demand for lucrative activities such as ultrasound-guided injections.
The claim that non-radiologists need to be trained and governed like a radiologist makes for an imminently
attractive sound byte, but naïvely lumps all uses of ultrasound into the same category. Indeed, given the
context above, does it represent an outdated way of thinking almost akin to proposing that anyone
auscultating heart sound should be trained and governed like a cardiologist?
In terms of point of care ultrasound (POCUS), the short answer is that the purpose of POCUS may vary
from traditional ultrasound examination and, therefore, require a different approach . Bargin outlined a
critical difference between ‘échographie’ and ‘échoscopie’ which could be translated as sonography and
sonoscopy, respectively.6 The former is essentially ultrasound as we traditionally know it carried out in
30/9/2014 Re: Will ultrasound scanners replace the stethoscope? | The BMJ
http://www.bmj.com/content/348/bmj.g3463/rr/700464 2/2
radiology departments: a well-defined standard examination to answer (a) defined question(s) reimbursed
with the reward of a defined tariff. This differs from sonoscopy which it is argued forms an extension of
physical examination (much like auscultation, pulse oximetry, or thermometer readings) in order to
support or negate findings during initial clinical assessment. Though there remains significant blurring of
the border between each approach, greater clarity in drawing distinctions between similar but varying
applications of the same tool might help future debate move forward. Moreover, perhaps there are
lessons to be learned from studying other types of technology-enhanced examination such as
dermoscopy which seems to have flourished with relatively little controversy.
Where comprehensive sonography is taking place in the community, further advances in technology may
help address some of these long-standing questions regarding governance. For example, inclusion of
internal gyroscopes within handheld probes – a technology already used in my phone – would allow an
extra layer of information which could be recorded in parallel to whole scan videos which could be stored
and shared as need facilitating the reinterpretation and quality control.
Finally, for those like myself with in an interest in studying the spread of this technology, a central register
of ultrasound machines capable of diagnostic imaging and their users, especially in community settings or
primary care, would potentially facilitate much needed research into the use of what is largely a hidden
practice, thus making it easier to try to answer some of these stubborn questions in due course.
Dr. Mark Karaczun
Academic Clinical Fellow in Primary Care
m.karaczun@uea.ac.uk
1) BMJ 2008; 336:7652; 1041-1043.
2) Sweetman, Greg M., Gail Crawford, Kathryn Hird, and Mark W. Fear. "The benefits and limitations of
using ultrasonography to supplement anatomical understanding." 2013: Anatomical sciences education 6,
no. 3: 141-148.
3) Hoppmann, Richard A., Victor V. Rao, Mary Beth Poston, Duncan B. Howe, Patrick S. Hunt, Stanley D.
Fowler, Lance E. Paulman et al. "An integrated ultrasound curriculum (iUSC) for medical students: 4-year
experience." 2011: Critical ultrasound journal 3, no. 1: 1-12.
4) Edwards, Hazel. « Let’s all jump on the ultrasound bandwagon : further debate on the use of ultrasound
» 2010: Ultrasound; 18 : 4-7.
5) Robinson, Louise, Jane Potterton, and Philip Owen. "Diagnostic ultrasound: a primary care-led
service?." 1997: The British Journal of General Practice 47, no. 418: 293
6) Bargin, Jean-Rémi. "Évaluation de l'indice de confiance des patients réalisant une échographie chez un
médecin généraliste diplômé en échographie." 2014: Université Joseph Fourier, Faculté de Médecine de
Grenoble (Thesis)
Competing interests: Received several weeks registrar-level training in basic ultrasound.
02 June 2014
Mark E. Karaczun
Academic Clinical Fellow in Primary Care
Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia
Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7TJ
Click to like:
8

