Low-cost teleradiology for rural ultrasound
Kristen K. DeStigter, MD & G. Eli Morey, MPH
Dept. of Radiology, Fletcher Allen Health Care
University of Vermont College of Medicine
Burlington, VT, USA
Matthew R. Rielly, PhD & Martin E. Anderson, PhD
Ultrasound Research and Development
Philips Healthcare
Bothell, WA, USA
Alphonsus Matovu, MBChB, MMed
Kamuli Mission Hospital
Kamuli, Uganda
Brian S. Garra, MD
Washington DC VA Medical Center and Division of
Imaging and Applied Mathematics,
CDRH, FDA. Silver Spring, MD, USA
Michael G. Kawooya, MBChB, MMed, PhD
Ernest Cook Ultrasound Research and Education Institute
Mengo Hospital
Kampala, Uganda
Frank R. Miele, MSEE
Pegasus Lectures, Inc.
Forney, TX, USA
Abstract: In under-resourced communities, there are several
preventable pregnancy complications that can lead to significant
maternal or perinatal morbidity and mortality when left
untreated. The lack of access to prenatal imaging is one of many
factors that contribute to the greater mortality rates in such
populations. Analysis of the most common complications suggest
that even limited access to obstetric ultrasound imaging could
have a positive impact, particularly in a rural context in which
imaging can prompt transport of the patient to a capable facility.
The authors describe their work to establish and validate an
obstetric care model in Uganda, and the design and for a clinical
study to measure this model’s efficacy in terms of improving
outcomes at delivery. The central objective of this care model is
to reduce mortality in remote locations by providing expectant
mothers and their primary care-givers with advance notice of
complications so that women at risk can be referred to
appropriate care centers in time. The components of this model
are described, including portable ultrasound machine, scanning
protocols for clinical data acquisition by local operators, custom
clinical data compression and transmission capabilities, and
internet-based infrastructure for remote reading and reporting.
The objectives, hypotheses, and design of the associated clinical
outcomes study and progress to date are also presented.
Keywords: Healthcare access, under-resourced, ultrasound,
imaging protocols, high-risk pregnancies, teleradiology
I. INTRODUCTION
Worldwide, complications of pregnancy and childbirth
contribute to 358,000 maternal deaths annually, 99% of which
occur in developing nations. More than 80% of mortality
occurs in areas of high birthrate with limited access to
healthcare, such as sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia [1].
More than half of these deaths are attributable to hemorrhage or
obstructed labor. Peripartum hemorrhage is responsible for
25% of maternal deaths. It is also a factor in fetal and neonatal
deaths. Approximately 5% of pregnancies are affected by
postpartum hemorrhage. Many are from uterine atony, which
has several causes, including but not limited to multiple
gestations, grand multiparity, and prolonged labor. At least 20-
30% of maternal hemorrhage is due to abnormal placentation:
placenta previa, placental abruption, and/or placenta accreta.
Abnormal placentation is an even greater issue in developing
nations than in developed nations because it is associated with
greater parity, particularly where contraceptive services may be
limited [2].
A certain number of these pregnancy complications could
be precluded with the use of ultrasound as a diagnostic tool.
However, under-resourced areas rarely have either ultrasound
equipment or trained personnel to operate them. Because
antenatal ultrasound is an obvious solution to these problems, it
is not surprising that ultrasound outreach programs are plentiful
in developing nations. Such programs may have limited
sustainability when they involve expensive and time-
consuming ongoing training of medical personnel and/or
outdated ultrasound machines that are difficult to maintain and
can demand considerable electrical power. These factors can
become obstacles for local workers after foreign-based trainers
and support personnel have left.
To the authors’ knowledge, the use of volume ultrasound in
prevention of maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality has no
precedent in the literature, such that the only known references
are the report of the authors’ previous work and preliminary
results from an IRB-approved study with Kamuli Mission
Hospital (KMH) and from a clinical project at Nawanyago
Health Center in Kamuli District, Uganda. This study is the
first major clinical outcomes test of the new technique in an
under-resourced country.
The long-term aim of this work is to mitigate the ultrasound
imaging deficit in the most under-resourced areas of the world
This work is supported by the Imaging the World Corporation (ITW) and the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (Seattle,WA), The Joseph Fineberg
Foundation (Los Angeles, CA), with in-kind and technical support from
Philips Healthcare (Andover, MA), GE Healthcare (Fairfield, CT), the
McKesson Corporation (San Francisco, CA), and peerVue, Inc. (Sarasota,
FL).
using a sustainable, low-cost technology-based solution. The
proposed care model enables minimally-trained primary
healthcare workers to capture and transmit ultrasound freehand
sweeps of key regions of interest. An integrated exam data
compression and transmission system automatically detects the
available network bandwidth and appropriately adjusts the file
sizes prior to transmission. These data are then uploaded to a
server where they can be accessed by expert readers either
locally or remotely. These readers can then review the images
for key indications and transmit their findings via text message
back to the rural areas via the cellular phone network, enabling
medical diagnosis anywhere such a phone network is in place.
The high-level objectives of the authors’ outcomes study
are to test whether (1) for certain common diagnoses, operators
with no technical knowledge or training will be able to acquire
and transmit images that equal the utility of traditional
ultrasound imaging (performed by an operator with years of
training), and (2) remote obstetric ultrasound diagnoses will
improve maternal and perinatal outcomes. These objectives
specifically target the World Health Organization Millennium
Development Goal #5, which aims to improve maternal health
by reducing maternal mortality and increasing skilled care [3].
II. STUDY METHODOLOGY
A. Overall study design
Through this study, the authors will test the health impact
of the use of special ultrasound volume imaging protocols
designed to allow non-physician health personnel with minimal
training in ultrasound to perform basic ultrasound
examinations. Up to six non-physician health workers with no
prior exposure to ultrasound will be trained to perform these
protocols, which do not require knowledge of internal anatomy
or ultrasound physics. After completing training, these trainees
will begin recruiting and examining patients at their respective
clinics. At experimental sites, each eligible, consenting patient
will receive an ultrasound examination using the obstetric scan
protocol.
Initial reports of the use of volume imaging in ultrasound
date from the late 1990s [4], and much of the original focus
was on 3D display in obstetrics [5-8]. This work coincided
with the development of mechanical 4D transducers that
created semi-real-time spatially calibrated 3D images. As
ultrasound instrumentation developed, the ability to create 3D
images of larger volumes was added by allowing users to
manually sweep a transducer over a large distance creating a
3D volume set of images. The development and deployment of
PACS capable of displaying these sweeps as a series of images
much like a CT or MRI series forms the basis of body volume
imaging [9, 10], which has now become part of the standard
ultrasound examination [11] because of its ability to provide
much more complete organ coverage than the older
“representative image” approach. The Imaging the World
(ITW) protocols take advantage of the exceptional organ
coverage provided by volume scanning not to further enhance
diagnostic accuracy, but to provide basic diagnostic capability
in a situation where the operator has minimal ultrasound
knowledge. During preliminary testing, these ITW protocols
have been shown to produce diagnostic quality images of
multiple organs [12].
Volumetric images are sent via the internet to health worker
expert ultrasound professionals at the Ernest Cook Ultrasound
Research and Education Institute, Kampala, Uganda
(ECUREI), and the Imaging the World Corporation (ITW),
who will provide interpretations. The interpretations are made
available to the local primary care provider to guide patient
management. Patients recruited at the control site will not
receive an ultrasound examination. Patients at both
experimental and control sites are followed throughout the
remainder of the pregnancy, delivery and in the postpartum
period, and specific outcomes data will be gathered and used to
evaluate improvements in maternal and perinatal morbidity and
mortality. Data from experimental sites will be compared with
contemporary and historical data from the control site to
determine whether utilization of special volume ultrasound
technology is an effective means of reducing pregnancy-
associated maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality.
B. Clinical site selection and historical data
The training portion of the protocol concept was tested at
one study locale in July 2010. A group of volunteers traveled
to Nawanyago in Kamuli District, Uganda and, under
Institutional Review Board supervision, spent two days training
nurse midwives in a rural health clinic to use external
anatomical landmarks to obtain hundreds of obstetrical images.
A team of radiologists in the US and Uganda is currently
evaluating the images for key indicators, such as placental
location, fetal number, and fetal presentation. Early indications
show that the images are of diagnostic quality.
In order to power the statistical analysis and allow detection
of a significant difference in outcomes, it is necessary to
properly account for underlying trends in the outcomes
variables that existed prior to the start of the study. To estimate
these trends, historic clinical outcomes data will be compiled
by accessing clinic logbooks that are kept at each of the clinics.
These logbooks contain pooled clinical data in the form of
monthly statistical reports. Data collected from these logbooks
will include, but will not be limited to, the number of prenatal
visits, the number of maternal admissions, and the numbers of
deliveries, live births, still births, and maternal deaths. Data
will be collected retrospectively at each clinic for a period of 3
years prior to the start of the current study.
In addition, an independent community of comparable size
and demographic makeup to the experimental groups will be
selected as a control site. The control site will remain
ultrasound naïve for the course of data collection.
Simultaneous enrollment of all eligible and consenting
participants for the duration of the study will occur at this
control site, just as with the experimental groups. Enrolled
patients will be followed throughout the course of their
pregnancy and childbirth. Although no recommendations for
care will be made, data will be gathered for each of the
previously mentioned clinical outcomes variables. Through
comparison of the control site and the intervention site, it will
be possible to isolate the effects of the diagnostic ultrasound
protocol being tested.
C. Technical infrastructure
A hardware reference system has been developed and tested
at the University of Vermont, Fletcher Allen Health Care with
the support of industrial partners (GE Healthcare and Philips
Healthcare). This system currently comprises a laptop
ultrasound system and a low-power netbook computer-based
local storage and transmission server connected to the
ultrasound system via wireless Ethernet, and to the remote
imaging collaboration server (Datarealm Services, Inc.,
Phoenix, AZ) via either a cellular modem or other internet
connection, e.g. satellite. The large volume of image data
contained in volume imaging must be highly compressed for
transmission over slow and sometimes unreliable connections
in developing countries. A method for doing this has been
developed and successfully tested using data from the existing
IRB-approved study [13].
D. Patient recruitment
Patient enrollment in the study will occur at each of the
three health centers and continue throughout the study period.
Health workers and patients are recruited by word of mouth in
each locale by talking to the community and pregnant mothers
who present at the clinics. The following criteria will be
applied:
a) Inclusion criteria: All female patients presenting at the
study sites within the study period, who are 16 years and
older, who are assumed or proven to be pregnant, and who are
willing to give informed consent will be enrolled.
b) Exclusion criteria: Patients not meeting the inclusion
criteria, or who are in an unstable medical condition (unless
ultrasound is necessary to define treatment) will be excluded
from the study. Patients with conditions requiring emergency
attention as determined by the attending clinical officer or
physician will also be excluded from enrollment.
Emergencies are conditions that require urgent medical or/and
surgical intervention, like severe bleeding from orifices, coma
or other deranged levels of consciousness.
c) Withdrawal or Discontinuation Criteria: Any health
worker trainee may withdraw at any point. A health worker
trainee may be asked to withdraw if he or she is physically
unable to perform the maneuvers required to scan patients (for
example hand arthritis preventing a person from gripping the
ultrasound transducer). If a person withdraws, another person
from a “reserve” pool of health workers, if available, will be
brought into the study. Any patient may, as is normally the
case, refuse participation in any part of this study, including
the diagnostic test (the scan).
E. Examiner Training:
Local health personnel at each of the experimental clinics
will undergo on-site training if they have not previously been
trained to administer volume protocol ultrasound scans. The
complete training sessions will last as long as needed for the
examiner to become comfortable performing the scan.
Training will involve both didactic modules for the
fundamentals of ultrasound, as well as hands-on training to
learn how to generate images with the protocol. The training
will be conducted by experienced project personnel from ITW
and from ECUREI as has been done in past ITW studies. The
trainees will pair off and one trainee will act as examiner and
the other will act as the “patient” during the training process.
This allows the trainees to experience what having an
ultrasound scan is like as well as learning how to perform a
simplified volume ultrasound scan. Typically at least four
practice scans of each type of scan are required to gain some
proficiency. The time required for this phase will be recorded
by the ITW trainer performing the training. The training will
include some physics and training on data security and patient
confidentiality as well as how to receive reports and act upon
results. Following completion of the training program, nurse
midwives will begin generating images at their clinic according
to the study protocol, when indicated by clinical history, signs
and symptoms. Much of the training will be conducted by
ECUREI trainers who have undergone a “train the trainers”
course by ITW staff. This approach is aimed at building
capacity within Uganda for this new type of ultrasound
training.
F. Scanning Protocols and Image Acquisition:
Because the ITW model is implemented in Nawanyago as a
proof of concept, all patients attending antenatal visits at the
health center are offered ultrasound scans, once per trimester,
aiming for 10-12 weeks, 18-22 weeks, and 34-36 weeks.
Ultrasound may be recommended by the nurse midwife at any
time based on clinical signs and symptoms. Patient data,
including clinical presentation and history, is entered into the
data field in the ultrasound machine. All patients are given
individual ITW numbers that allow confidentiality to be
maintained during image transmission, clinical data collection,
and outcomes analysis.
The ITW obstetric protocol incorporates six 3-D volume
sweeps over the pregnant abdomen (e.g. Fig. 1). These sweeps
(cine loops) can be learned by an untrained person with limited
knowledge of internal anatomy in a few hours. The protocol is
designed to evaluate basic but potentially life-saving findings:
to confirm intrauterine pregnancy, to assess fetal number, fetal
presentation, placenta position, and amniotic fluid volume, and
to look for a pelvic mass. A low-frequency curved transducer
is used to obtain sweeps with the pregnant patient in a supine
position, having a full bladder. The ultrasound machine has
been configured by the manufacturer and ITW experts to
provide three presets for three body mass index (BMI)
categories, (small, medium, and large) and the operator needs
only to choose one of the presets based on known BMI. Often,
the BMI correlates to the gestational age (e.g. large for third
trimester).
Figure 2. A schematic of the information flow among the centers
involved. Exam data from rural clinics is compressed and transmitted to
a remote PACS, via which remote readers can review them and report
their findings to the rural clinic and the regional referral hospital.
Figure 1. One example of the free-hand sweeps defined by the ITW
protocol for obstetrical imaging.
Three transverse (transducer notch to the patient’s right)
sweeps are obtained from the pubic bone to the level of the
breast bone, one midline, one to the right of midline, and one to
the left of midline, arcing the transducer at either end of the
sweep. Sweeps are acquired at 3-4 cm per second with each
sweep no longer than 10 seconds to maintain diagnostic quality
during compression for transfer. Subsequently, longitudinal
(notch toward the patient’s chin) sweeps are generated, the first
one low just above the pelvic bone, angled toward the pelvic
bone, from the left hip to the right hip; the second is obtained in
the same manner at the level of the umbilicus; a third
longitudinal sweep is generated in the same fashion just below
the breast bone.
Images are saved as volume sweeps that are then sent via a
wireless router to a netbook/laptop computer. Custom-built
compression software in the laptop is used to compress the
images for transmission over a regular cellular telephone
network (MTN modem inserted into the USB port of the
laptop). The images are then sent to a secure server where they
are decompressed and sent to the secure distributed client of the
picture archiving and communications system on the internet.
As stated above, enrolled patients who have met the
selection criteria will continue to receive the normal level of
care, with the addition of ultrasound imaging. Initial
ultrasound exams will be performed for all participants at the
first visit to establish intrauterine gestation and assess for
multiples. This first visit will generally occur during the first
trimester of pregnancy. Subsequent ultrasound exams will be
performed during the second trimester if indicated, or if an
earlier scan was not performed. Third trimester scans will be
performed on all participants for fetal and placenta positioning
as well as amniotic fluid volume. Each study participant will
receive these imaging tests regardless of their risk of pregnancy
complications. The nurse or midwife health worker will
perform each transabdominal ultrasound according to the
protocol described above. At each ultrasound visit, other
health indicators will be assessed and reported using the
standard form.
G. Image Interpretation
As shown in the schematic in Fig. 2, once a volume scan is
completed on an enrolled patient, it is sent in compressed
format over the internet to an internationally accessible secure
server. Qualified ultrasound experts in Uganda and the USA
who have undergone a selection process, including credentials
verification, will have access to the server’s images (e.g. Fig. 3)
using an electronic database (peerVue, Sarasota, FL).
The interpretation will be recorded using a specially
designed structured reporting form within this database. A
simplified version of the finalized report will automatically be
sent to the nurse midwife at the clinic as a text message to the
cell phone. The full report can be made available on-line or
sent as an email for electronic access by the nurse midwife or
KMH. Image data and results data will be kept secure on the
ITW server behind firewalls with password protection.
H. Recommending care:
As described above, interpretations of ultrasound images
rendered by volunteer radiologists in Uganda and the USA will
be communicated to the patient in the form of clinical
recommendations from the nurse midwife to the patient, often
necessary after consulting with the doctor at KMH (e.g. a
diagnosis of placenta previa may be communicated to the
patient with a recommendation for transfer to a regional
hospital). These recommendations will be passed on to the
patient during the same visit in case of emergencies or at a
follow-up visit for routine exams. All mothers will be
encouraged to have their labor attended by a skilled practitioner
at the clinic. Adherence to these recommendations will be
tracked.
I. The outcomes study objectives and hypothesis
The objectives of the study are as follows:
a) Track the number of deliveries attended by skilled
health care providers.
b) Track the number of antenatal visits per patient at each
location.
Figure 3. Representative images stored on the secure
above are from a 2nd
trimester fetal presentation obtain
Health Center, showing the fetal head (top) and the p
c) Track the number and causes of patien
the clinic to a regional hospital.
d) Track the number and causes of ma
and mortality.
e) Track the number and causes of per
and mortality.
f) Track the number and description
findings that are identified from remote image
g) Track the number and type of ultr
that are associated with maternal and perinat
mortality
h) Track the number of ultrasound scans
change in patient management.
server. The images
ned at Nawanyago
placenta (bottom).
nts referrals from
aternal morbidity
rinatal morbidity
n of diagnostic
e review.
rasound findings
tal morbidity and
that resulted in a
i) Track the number of ultraso
patient being successfully treated.
j) Compare each of the tr
between the experimental group
determine changes in outcomes th
implementation of ultrasound techn
k) Determine the proportion
than can be prevented with the mod
The volume exam data will allo
diagnoses (e.g. placenta previa,
multiple births). An analysis of
from pilot studies conducted in Bel
2010 suggest that use of this pro
increase diagnostic rates for impor
It is hypothesized that the experime
show statistically significant impro
site and, when compared to historic
rates of births attended by a sk
increased number of antenatal vis
pregnancy, and significantly decrea
perinatal morbidity and mortality.
J. Data analysis:
Analysis of clinical outcome d
difference-of-means tests that dete
experimental groups and the contr
implementations of this type of test t
• One-sample t-test to determ
significantly different from
the average infant mortality
• Independent sample t-test b
and population [this assum
both; with this test all exp
collapsed into one]
• Paired t-test between expe
versus Time 2 [e.g. bef
diagnoses are introduced]
• ANOVA + post-hoc analy
groups to identify any dif
individual groups, and then
location of these difference
infant mortality rate in the t
and then another or the broa
Given the data sets that this s
analyses to be applied to test the
independent sample t-test and the AN
III. PROGRESS
A. Progress to date
While evaluating the training p
quality of images captured using th
observed that during a one year pe
increase in both antenatal visits an
clinic compared to the correspond
year. In addition, several patients w
to the regional hospital, Kamuli Mi
ound scans that resulted in a
racked clinical outcomes
and the control data to
hat are attributable to the
ology.
of each adverse outcome
del.
ow remote readers to make
breech presentation, and
preliminary data collected
lize in 2008 and Uganda in
otocol can be expected to
rtant gestational conditions.
ental sites in this study will
ovements over the control
trends, significantly higher
killed health care worker,
sits during the duration of
ased rates of maternal and
data will consist of simple
ct differences between the
rol group. There a several
that can be used:
mine if treatment groups are
some constant value [e.g. if
rate in Uganda is known]
between experimental group
mes individual data from
erimental groups would be
erimental group at Time 1
fore and after ultrasound
ysis: tests across all four
fferences among means of
further tests to identify the
es [e.g. difference in mean
three affected health centers
ader population]
study will collect, the two
overall hypotheses are the
NOVA + post-hoc analysis.
S TO DATE
protocols and studying the
he ITW model, it has been
eriod there has been a 70%
nd deliveries at Nawanyago
ding period of the previous
were successfully transferred
ission Hospital (KMH), for
surgical delivery. So far over five hundred patients have been
scanned and successfully stored on a remote PACS server as
part of the image quality evaluation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the study sponsors and partners for their
support of this study.
REFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization, UNICEF, UNFPA, The World Bank,
“Trends in maternal mortality: 1990 to 2008”, 2010,
http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/monitoring/
9789241500265/en/.
[2] S. E. Geller et al., “Postpartum hemorrhage in resource-poor settings,”
Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2006 Mar 92(3), pp. 202-11.
[3] “MDG 5: improve maternal health”, United Nations Millennium
Declaration, September 2015, http://www.who.int/topics/
millennium_development_goals/about/en/index.html.
[4] “Volume ultrasound: useful tool for musculoskeletal, breast and
pediatric imaging” MedicExchange.com, November 30, 1999,
http://www.medicexchange.com/Breast-Mammary-Gland/volume-
ultrasound-useful-tool-for-musculoskeletal-breast-and-pediatric-
imaging.html.
[5] M. Riccabona, D. H. Pretorius, T. R. Nelson, et al., “Three-dimensional
ultrasound: display modalities in obstetrics”, J Clin Ultrasound 1997;
25(4), pp. 157-167.
[6] E. Merz, F. Bahlmann, G. Weber, “Volume scanning in the evaluation of
fetal malformations: a new dimension in prenatal diagnosis”, Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 1995; 5(4), pp. 222-227.
[7] T. R. Nelson, D. H. Pretorius, “Three-dimensional ultrasound of fetal
surface features”, Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992; 2, pp. 166-174.
[8] D. Jurkovic, K. Gruboeck, “Three-dimensional ultrasound of the uterus”
In: K. Baba, D. Jurkovic, eds. Three-dimensional ultrasound in
obstetrics and gynecology. New York: Parthenon, 1997, pp.67-74.
[9] B. S. Garra, J. T. Doherty, “Advanced applications make ultrasound
more competitive”, Diagnostic Imaging, Nov 2, 2005.
[10] S. R. Wilson, C. Gupta, M. Eliasziw, and A. Andrew, “Volume Imaging
in the Abdomen With Ultrasound: How We Do It”, Am J Roentgenol,
July 1, 2009; 193(1), pp. 79-85.
[11] T. S. Elliott, “Volume ultrasound: the next big thing?”, British Journal
of Radiology 2008; 81, pp. 8-9.
[12] B.S.Garra, K. Destigter, B McEathron, A.Dattamajumdar, R. Widmer,
R. Jakobovits, M. Fiuczynski, G.Rouillard, S. Maguire, J. Richbourg, D.
Zion, R. Peterson, and S. Braff, “Scan protocols for use by nonmedical
personnel in developing countries: organ visibility and reproducibility
evaluation” J Ultrasound Med 2008; 27(3): S16-17.
[13] B.S.Garra, K. DeStigter, S. Maguire, L. Mobbs, G. Rouillard, D. Smith,
et.al., “Data Compression for Transmission of Volume Imaging From
Developing Countries”. Presented at the 2008 Convention of the
Radiological Society of North America, 30 November 2008, Chicago,
IL, USA.
