Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler for clinicians
The page is part of the website on Strain rate imaging
Myocardial deformation imaging by ultrasound / echocardiography
Tissue Doppler and Speckle Tracking
by Asbjørn Støylen, dr. med.
Contact address: asbjorn.stoylen@ntnu.no
This section updated: December 2014
This web page is intended as an introduction to basic ultrasound physics and technology for clinicians without
technical or mathematical background. A basic knowledge of the physical principles underlying ultrasound, will
give a better understanding of the practical limitations in ultrasound, and the technical solutions used to solve
the problems. This will give a clearer picture of the reasons for the problems and artifacts. Technical or
mathematical background is not necessary, explanations are intended to be intuitive and graphic, rather than
mathematical. This section is important for the understanding of the basic principles described in detail in the
section on measurements of strain rate by ultrasound. Especially in order to understand the fundamental
principles that limits the methods.The priciples will also be useful to gain a basic understanding of
echocardiography in general, and may be read separately, even if deformation imaging is not interesting.
Section index
Ultrasound
What are the ultrasound data?
Imaging by ultrasound
Reflection and scattering
Absorption
Ultrasound Power / Mechanical index
Attenuation
Gain
Time gain compensation (TGC)
Compress and reject
M-mode
Depth resolution. Bandwidth.
2-Dimensional imaging
Beamforming
Beam focusing
Lateral resolution
Line density
Temporal resolution
Depth
Sector width and line density
Multiple line acquisition (MLA)
3D Ultrasound
artifacts
Shadows
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
1 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Reverberations
Side lobes
Angle dependency
Foreshortening
Non linear wave propagation and harmonic imaging
Speckle formation
Speckle tracking
The Doppler effect
Angle deviation in Doppler measurement
Spectral analysis
Spectrum width
Pulsed and continuous wave Doppler
The Nykvist phenomenon
HPRF
Colour Doppler
Colour flow
Tissue Doppler
Colour tissue Doppler
Curved anatomical M-mode (CAMM)
Velocity traces
Measurement of peak values in relation to the Doppler spectrum
Reverberations in tissue Doppler
Ultra high frame rate tissue Doppler (UFR-TDI)
Strain rate imaging by tissue Doppler
Strain rate by linear regression
Strain by speckle tracking
Relation between velocity, displacement, strain and strain rate
Harmonic tissue Doppler
Tracking by combined speckle tracking and tissue Doppler
Back to website index
Next section:
Measurements of strain and strain rate by Ultrasound
Related section:
Mathemathics of strain and strain rate
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is simply sound waves, like audible sound. Although some physical properties is dependent on the
frequency, the basic principles are the same. Sound consists of waves of compression and decompression of the
transmitting medium (e.g. air or water), traveling at a fixed velocity. Sound is an example of a longitudinal wave
oscillating back and forth in the direction the sound wave travels, thus consisting of successive zones of
compression and rarefaction. Transverse waves are oscillations in the transverse direction of the propagation.
(For instance surface waves on water or electromagnetic radiation.)
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
2 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of a longitudinal compression wave (top) and transverse wave (bottom). The bottom figure can also
represent the pressure amplitude of the sound wave.
The audible sound frequencies are below 15 000 to 20 000 Hz, while diagnostic ultrasound is in the range of 1 -
12 MHz. Audible sound travels around corners, we can hear sounds around a corner (sound diffraction). With
higher frequencies Shorter wavelengths) the sound tend to move more in straight lines like electromagnetic
beams, and will be reflected like light beams. They will be reflected by much smaller objects (also because of
shorter wavelengths), and does not propagate easily in gaseous media.
The wavelength is inversely related to the frequency f by the sound velocity c:
Meaning that the velocity equals the wavelength times the number of oscillations per second, and thus:
The sound velocity i a given material is constant (at a given temperature), but varies in different materials (117):
Material Velocity ( m/s)
Air 330
Water 1497
Fat 1440
Average soft tissue 1540
Blood 1570
Muscle 1500 - 1630
Bone 2700 - 4100
Metal 3000 - 6000
Ultrasound is generated by piezoelectric crystals that vibrates when compressed and decompressed by an
alternating current applied across the crystal, the same crystals can act as receivers of reflected ultrasound, the
vibrations induced by the ultrasound pulse.
What are the ultrasound data?
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
3 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
The ultrasound data can be sampled at different levels of complexity as shown below:
Basically, a reflected ultrasound pulse is a
waveform. However, storing the full
waveform, called RF data, is demanding in
terms of storage, as each point on the curve
would have to be represented in some way or
other. However, if the full RF data are stored,
the amplitude and frequency data could both
be calculated in post processing.
The pulse has a certain amplitude. Just storing the amplitude is much les demanding
(corresponding more or less to one number per pulse). This is the only data that are
grey scale imaging, where the amplitude is displayed as brightness of the point
correspåonding to the scatterer as in B-mode and M-mode.
Imaging by ultrasound
Reflection and scattering
Basically, all ultrasound imaging is performed by emitting a pulse, which is partly reflected from a boundary
between two tissue structures, and partly transmitted (fig. 2). The reflection depends on the difference in
impedance of the two tissues. Basic imaging by ultrasound does only use the amplitude information in the
reflected signal. One pulse is emitted, the reflected signal, however, is sampled more or less continuously
(actually multiple times). As the velocity of sound in tissue is fairly constant, the time between the emission of a
pulse and the reception of a reflected signal is dependent on the distance; i.e. the depth of the reflecting
structure. The reflected pulses are thus sampled at multiple time intervals (multiple range gating), corresponding
to multiple depths, and displayed in the image as depth.
Different structures will reflect different amount of the emitted energy, and thus the reflected signal from
different depths will have different amplitudes as shown below. The time before a new pulse is sent out, is
dependent of the maximum desired depth that is desired to image.
Fig. 2. Schematic illustration of the reflection of an ultrasound pulse emitted from the probe P, being reflected at a, b and c. Part of the
pulse energy is transmitted from the scatterer a, the rest is transmitted, part from b and the rest from c. When the pulse returns to P, the
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
4 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
reflected pulse gives information of two measurements: The amplitude of the reflected signal, and the time it takes returning, which is
dependent on the distance from the probe(twice the time the sound uses to travel the distance between the transmitter and the reflector, as
the sound travels back and forth). The amount of energy being reflected from each point is given in the diagram as the amplitude.
When this is measured, the scatterer is displayed with amplitude and position. Thus, the incoming pulse a a is the full amplitude of P. At
b, the incoming (incident) pulse is the pulse transmitted through a. At c, the incident pulse is the transmitted pulse from b. (In bot cases
minus further attenuation in the interval.)
The time lag, , between emitting and receiving a pulse is the time it takes for sound to travel the distance to
the scatterer and back, i.e. twice the range, r, to the scatterer at the speed of sound, c, in the tissue. Thus:
The pulse is thus emitted, and the system is set to await the reflected signals, calculating the depth of the
scatterer on the basis of the time from emission to reception of the signal. The total time for awaiting the
reflected ultrasound is determined by the preset depth desired in the image.
The received energy at a certain time, i.e. from a certain depth, can be displayed as energy amplitude, A-mode.
The amplitude can also be displayed as the brightness of the certain point representing the scatterer, in a
B.mode plot. And if some of the scatterers are moving, the motion curve can be traced by letting the B-mode
image sweep across a screen or paper as illustrated in fig. 3. This is called the M-mode (Motion).
Fig. 3a. The ultrasound
image is built up as a line
of echoes based on the time
lag and amplitude of the
reflected signals.
3b. The reflected signals can be displayed in three different modes. A-mode (Amplitude) shows the depth
and the reflected energy from each scatterer. B-mode (Brightness) shows the energy or signal amplitude
as the brightness (in this case the higher energy is shown darker, against a light background) of the point.
The bottom scatterer is moving. If the depth is shown in a time plot, the motion is seen as a curve, (and
horizontal lines for the non moving scatterers) in a M-mode plot (Motion).
The ratio of the amplitude (energy) of the reflected pulse and the incident is called the reflection coefficient.
The ratio of the amplitude of the incident pulse and the transmitted pulse is called the transmission coefficient.
Both are dependent on the differences in acoustic impedance of the two materials. The acoustic impedance of a
medium is the speed of sound in the material × the density:
Z = c ×
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
5 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Thus, if the velocities of sound in two materials are very different, the reflection will be close to total, and no
energy will pass into the deepes material. This occurs in bondary zones between f.i. soft tissue and bone, and
soft tissue and air. This means that the deepest material can be considered to be in a shadow.
The reflecting structures does not only reflect directly back to the transmitter, but scatters the ultrasound in
more directions. Thus, the reflecting structures are usually termed scatterers.
It's important to realise that the actual amount of energy that is reflected back to the probe; i.e. the
amplitude of the reflected signal, is not only dependent on the reflection coefficient. The direction of the
reflected signal is also important.
Thus:
- An irregular scatterer will reflect only a portion back to the probe.
- A more regular scatterer will reflect more if the reflecting surfaces are perpendicular to the ultrasound
beam.
Effect of size and direction of the reflecting surface. The two images on the left shows a perfect reflecting surface. Most of the energy (bu
as the wavefront is not flat), will reflect back to the transducer resulting in a high amplitude echo, when the surface is perpendicular to the
ultrasound beam. On the other hand, if this surface is tilted 45º, almost all energy will be reflected away from the surface, resulting in a
amplitude return echo to the probe. The next two images shows a scatterer with a more curved surface, resulting in more energy being spre
different directions, this will give a lower amplitude signal back to the probe, but may reflect more energy back towards the probe if it is til
for instance when the heart contracts, walls changing direction. Finally, to the left, a totally irregylar surface will reflect the sound in all dire
butt very little net reflectionstoward the probe.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
6 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
The effect of the direction of the reflecting surface in a
long axix image of the left ventricle. The echo resulting
from the septum-blood interface (arrows) is far stronger
in the regions where the surfaces are perpendicular to the
ultrasound beamns (blue arrows), compared to the region
between where the surface is slanted compared to the
ultrasound beams.
Cyclic variations in the amplitude in reflected ultrasound (integrated backscatte
heart cycle. This reflect the variations in reflexivity, but not myocardial density,
myocardium is incompressible. Thus, most of the amplitude variations must be d
changes in fibre directions.
The term: Reflection is used about the return signal, while scattering is used about dispersion of the reflected
signal, but as the figure above shows, it's the same process.
Thus, the apparent density of the tissue on the ultrasound image is as dependent on the wall and fibre
direction. A part of the heart where the fibres run mainly in a direction across the ultrasound beams, will look
much denser. Variations in amplitude (brightness of the reflected signal) do not necessarily mean differences in
density, but may also mean variations in reflectivity due to variation in the direction of the reflections. Thus,
integrated backscatter can be used for studying of cyclicity, but it is not useful for tissue characterisation.
Absorption
Some of the energy of the ultrasound is absorbed by the tissues, and converted to heat. This indicates that it
may have biological effects, if the absorbed energy is high enough.
Absorption is important for two reasons:
The heating of the tissue is the safety limitation on ultrasound equipment. The absorbed energy has to
remain within limits that does not heat the tissue to dangerous temperatures. The absorption can be
calculated, and in commercial equipment today, the limitation is imposed in the limitation of the total
energy that can be transmitted (which is expressed by the mechanical index).
The attenuation, which is mainly due to absorption, is the limiting factor for the depth penetration of the
beam, i.e. the depth to which the beam can be transmitted.
The absorption is dependent on many factors (117):
The density of the tissue. The higher the density, the more absorption. Thus the attenuation is fluid < fat <
muscle < fibrous tissue < calcifications and bone.
1.
The frequency of the ultrasound beam. The higher the frequency, the more absorption. In human tissue, a
general approximation is that the attenuation is 1 dB/cm MHz. (however, that is for one way, in imaging
the distance is 2* the depth). Thus, the desired depth to be imaged, sets the limit for how high frequency
that can be used. As can be seen, penetration might be increased by increasing the transmitted energy, but
this would increase the total absorbed energy as well, which has to stay below the safety limits.
2.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
7 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Ultrasound Power / mechanical index
The ultrasound power is the amplitude of the transmitted signal, at the probe. I.e. The total energy that is
transmitted into the patient. This is measured in deciBels.
The mechanical index, is the amount of energy that is absorbed by the patient. This, howver is not inly
dependent on the power, but also on the focussing of the beam, and is highest where the beam is focussed, but it
also decreases with depth. Thus, the mechanical index is a measure of the possible biological effects of the
ultrtasound, and is usually calculated and given as a maximal theoretical entity, by the equipment. Usually, it
may vary between 1.5 (in B-mode) and 0.1 (in contrast applications).
Attenuation
It follows that the ultrasound waves are attenuated as some of the energy is reflected or scattered. Thus, in
passing through tissue, the energy is attenuated due to the reflection that is necessary to build an image.
Attenuation will have effect on the image in other ways, as shown blow.
Attenuation. Imaging of a homogeneous tissue, f.i. liver will change the
apparent density behind structures with different attenuation.
Behind a structure with high reflexivity (e.g. a calcification), there will
be high attenuation, (white; left). Hence, the sector behind receives
less energy, and appears less dense (darker), the area behind may even
be a full shadow.
Behind a strcture with low reflexivity (e.g. a fluid) there is little
attenuation (black; right), the tissue receives more energy and appears
denser (brighter - "colouring") than the surrounding tissue.
Liver with a gallbladder in front, containing gallstones.
The gallstones are dense, with a shadow behind. The rest
of the gallbladdeer is fluid filled, thus the sector behind
the fluid appears denser than the neighbouring tissue due
to "colouring".
This is about 10% of the total energy loss. In addition, the ultrasound waves are diffracted, resulting in further
diffusion of the waves out into the surrounding tissue and loss in the energy available for reflection (imaging).
However, the most important factor is the the ultrasound energy is attenuated due to absorption in the tissue,
this absorption process generates heating of the tissue. It follows that as attenuation is energy loss, this means
that the attenuation increases with increasing depth. ( And the reflections are further attenuated in passing back
toward the probe).
The attenuation is the limiting factor for the depth penetration of the beam, i.e. the depth to which the beam can
be transmitted, and still give useful signals back. Basically, the shorter the wavelength, the higher the
attenuation (and thus the shorter the depth penetration). The effective range can be said to be about 200 - 300 x
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
8 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
. For practical medical purposes, the penetration for good imaging is about 10 - 20 cm at 3.5 MHz (adult
cardiac), 5 - 10 cm at about 5 MHZ (pediatric cardiac), 2-5 cm at 7.5 MHz, 1-4 cm at 10 MHZ, the last two
frequencies being in the vascular domain. However, one method to bypass some of the attenuation problem is
by harmonic imaging. Thus the beam is transmitted at a certain frequency, and the received signal is analysed at
twice that frequency (Fourier analysis). This increases the signal to noise ratio of the reflected signal, especially
at the deepest parts of the image, without a similar loss of resolution.
Gain
Attenuation can be dealt with by gain, increasing gain amplifies the reflected signal in post processing.
However, increased gain increases signal and noise in the same manner. Gain can be done at acquisition, or in
post processing.
Uncompensated image, showing decreasing signal intensity
(and, hence, visibility) with depth, due to attenuation.
Increasing over all gain, will increase the amplitude of the signal,
and the structures at the bottom of the sector becomes more
visible. But the gain in the top of the sector are also increased,
including the cavity noise, thus decreasing contast in this part of
the image.
Time gain compensation (TGC)
All commercial equipment today has a time gain compensation (TGC). This increases the gain of the reflected
signals with increasing time from the transmitted pulse; equivalent to increasing the gain with increasing depth.
However, this is not a perfect solution, as the signal-to-noise ratio may decrease, if the noise does not decrease
similarly with depth. However, it will give a better balance in the picture, and compensate for much of the
attenuation effects. This is a pre processing function, and has to be set at acquisition.
TGC controls. Basically, each slider controls gain selectively at a
certain depth:
In older models, the TGC should be set manually to achieve a
balanced image:
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
9 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Present models, however, have automatic TGC. Thus the default
control setting should be neutral to achieve a balanced picture:
Using manual setting by old habit will result in a double
compensation, with too much gain in the bottom, too little in the top:
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
10 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Compress and reject:
Low amplitude signals can be filtered away, resulting in filtering out cavity noise, however at the price of risking
to loose low amplitude signals (e.g. from valves.) by the reject function.
Finally, the grey scale can be compressed, resulting in a steeper saturation curve. This means that the picture
goes to full saturation (pure white) at a lower amplitude, while the brightness of low amplitude signals are
reduced.
It is important to realise that all these are post-processing functions that manipulates the image on the screen,
without improving the signal quality itself, or the fundamental signal to noise ratio.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
11 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Image with default gain, reject and compress settings Principle of gain, reject and compress. All curves display b
display in relation to the amplitude of the rejected signal. A
curve is shown in black, using a linear brightness scale, disp
of amplitudes. Increasing gain (red curve), will increase all
the weakest, as in the noise. The disadvantage, in addition t
is that the strongest signals will be saturated, so details may
Compress is shown as the blue curve. This results in a steep
curve, resulting in less brightness of the weakest echoes, an
of the strongest. Thus, weak echoes may disappear togethe
noise, while strong echoes will be saturated, resulting in los
reject is shown by the light grey zone, siply displaying all si
certain amplitude as black. (The black brightnes curve drop
at the reject limit (dark grey line). A combination of high g
give an effect fairly similar to the compress function.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
12 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Same image with high gain (top) showing increased density of the
endocardium, but loss of detail due to brightness saturation and a
corresponding increase in cavity noise and low gain (bottom), showing
reduction in cavity noise, but loss of detail (see endocardium in lateral wall).
Same image with increased reject (top) showing reduction i
also with slight loss of detail (endocardium in lateral wall) a
function (bottom) with less detail in the myocardium due to
brightness.
All commercial equipment today has a time gain compensation (TGC), increasing the gain of the reflected
signals with increasing time from the transmitted pulse. This is equivalent to increasing the gain with increasing
depth. However, this is not a perfect solution, as the noise is constant with depth, while the reflected signals
become weaker, and with TGC, the noise will be gained as well as the signal, and the signal-to-noise ratio will
decrease, thus the resulting signal will end up as a grey blur at a certain depth. This effect can be seen below.
Before harmonic imaging, the TGC was adjustable, relying on the operator to optimise the visibility. AS the
greater part of cavity noise is removed by the harmonic imaging, most modern equipment has automated TGC,
but retains the possibility of manual adjustment.
M-mode
The M-mode was the first ultrasound modality to record display moving echoes from the heart (118), and thus
the motion could be interpreted in terms of myocardial and valvular function. The M-modes were originally
recorded without access to 2-dimensional images.
a b
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
13 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Fig. 4. Typical M-mode images. a from left ventricle, b from the mitral valve and c from the aortic valve as indicated on the 2D long
axis image above. Here the amplitude is displayed in white on dark background.
Depth resolution. Bandwidth:
The depth resolution of the ultrasound beam, is the resolution along the beam. This is dependent on the length
of the transmitted ultrasound pulse. In a blood / tissue interface, the dividing line can be seen as a bright line,
which does not reflect a tissue stricture (typically NOT the intima, being far too thin to be seen with ultrasound
at the present frequences), but the pulse length. This is the reason for the ASE convention, where depths are
measured from leading - to - leading edge of the echoes, as this will neutralise the pulse length form
measurements.
Ideally, the pulse length in imaging (B- and M-mode) should be as short as possible, but this is dependent on the
physical properties of the probe. Most probes will ring in the resonance frequency for a few oscillations, and
thus produce a pulse with a length of several oscillations. By Fourier analysis, the frequency content of the
pulse will be less dispersed, the longer the pulse is. Thus, the pulse length is inversely proportional with the
spread of the frequency, i.e. the bandwidth of the pulse, as shown below. This will have consequences for
Doppler imaging, where frequencies, and not amplitudes are analysed.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
14 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Two different pulses with the same frequency, but different duration (pulse length), i.e. Number of oscillations. The shortest
pulse has a wider dispersion of frequencies, i.e. a greater bandwidth. After Angelsen (117).
Higher frequencies will result in shorter pulses for the same number of oscillations, i.e. reduce pulse length
without increasing bandwidth to the same degree. Thus, for imaging, the ideal pulse would be highest possible
frequency (depending on the required depth penetration) and the shortest possible pulse length. However, as
noise is unevenly distributed in different frequency domains, harmonic imaging, which analyses at half the
frequency, will result in less noise. Harmonic imaging thus doubles the pulse length for a given frequency, and
results in thicker echoes.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
15 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Halving the frequency results in half the number of oscillations per time unit, or longer time (= pulse length) for the same number
of oscillations. Thus halving the frequency, as in second harmonic analysis, will result in longer pulse length. However, the
bandwidth is far less affected.
Second harmonic (1.7/3.5 MHz) left and fundmental (3.5 MHz) right images of LV
septum, showing how the echo from the blood/septum interface (arrows) is thicker in
harmonic imaging, due to the reduction in frequency. Observe, however, how cavity
noise is much reduced in harmonic imaging, resulting in a far more favorable signal-
to-noise ratio.
The thickness of the surtface echoes is dependent
the frequency. This picture of the septum illustrat
convention shown in red, eliminates the pulse lengt
blooms in both directions), while the Penn convent
overestimation of the thickness by increasing pulse
interface on both sides.
The most important point is that the echo from an interface reflects the pulse length, and is NOT a
picture of the endothelium.
2-dimensional imaging:
A 2-dimensional image is built up by firing a beam vertically, waiting for the return echoes, maintaining the
information and then firing a new line from a neighboring transducer along a tambourine line in a sequence of
B-mode lines. In a linear array of ultrasound crystals, the electronic phased array shoot parallel beams in
sequence, creating a field that is as wide as the probe length (footprint). A curvilinear array has a curved
surface, creating a field in the depth that is wider than the footprint of the probe, making it possible to create a
smaller footprint for easier access through small windows. This will result in a wider field in depth, but at the
cost of reduced lateral resolution as the scan lines diverge.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
16 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
A pulse is sent out,
ultrasound is
reflected, and the
B-mode line is built
up from the reflected
signals.
Linear array. Curvilinear arra
The linear array gives a large probe surface (footprint) and near field, and a narrow sector. A curvilinear array
will also give a large footprint and near field, but with a wide sector.
But in order to achieve a footprint sufficiently small to get access to the heart between the ribs, and with a
sufficiently wide far field, the beams has to diverge from virtually the same point. This means that the image has
to be generated by a single beam originating from the same point, being deflected in different angles to build a
sector image (cf. figs. 6 and 7).
This can be achieved by a single transducer or array sending a single beam that is stepwise rotated, either
mechanically or electronically.
A very small footprint can be achieved by a mechanical probe, sending only one beam, but being mechanically
rotated by a motor. Finally with a slightly larger footprint, a phased array with electronic focusing and steering,
can generate a beam sweeping at an angle similar to the mechanical probe. Beamforming by phased array, also
enables focusing of the ultrasound beam as shown. Focusing can also be performed in a mechanical probe, by a
concentric arrangement of several ring shaped transducers, an annular array. This will focus the beam in both
transverse directions at the same time, as indicated in fig. 7A.
The next line in the image is then formed by a slight angular rotation , making the beam sweep across a sector:
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
17 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
By making the ultrasound beam sweep over a
sector, the image can be made to build up an
image, consisting of multiple B-mode lines.
c. In principle, the image is built up line by line, by emitting the pulse, waiting for the reflected e
before tilting the beam and emitting the next pulse. Resulting in an image being built up with a wh
taking the time for emitting the total number of pulses corresponding to the total number of lines i
image.
This means that as a pulse is sent out, the transducer has to wait for the returning echoes, before a new pulse
can be sent out, generating the next line in the image.
2D echocardiography. A line is sent out, and as all echoes along the beam are received, the picture along the beam is retained, and a
new beam is sent out in the neighboring region. building up the next line in the image. one full sweep of the beam will then build up a
complete image; i.e one frame. A cine-loop is then a sequence of frames; i.e. a movie.
The present technology is sufficient to build up a picture wit sufficient depth and resolution with about 50
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
18 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
frames per second (FPS), which gives a good temporal resolution for 2D visualisation of normal heart action (
about 70 beats per min.). However, the eye has a resolution of about 25 frames per second, so there may seem
to be excess information. But off-line replay may be done at reduced frame rate, thus enabling the eye to utilise
a higher temporal resolution.
Beamforming
Fig. 7A. Mechanical transducer. The sector is
formed by rotating a single transducer or array of
transducers mechanically, firing one pulse in each
direction and then waiting for the return pulse
before rotating the transducer one step. In this
beam there is electronic focusing as well, by an
annular array.
B. Electronic transducer in a phased array. By stimulating the transducers in a
rapid sequence , the ultrasound will be sent out in an interference pattern.
According to Huygens principle, the wavefront will behave as a single beam,
thus the beam is formed by all transducers in the array, and the direction is
determined by the time sequence of the pulses sent to the array. Thus, the beam
can be electronically steeredand will then sweep stepwise over the sector in
the same way as the mechanical transducer in A, sending a beam in one
direction at a time.
Beam focusing:
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
19 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Dynamic focusing. The same principle of phase steering can be
applied to make a concave wavefront, resulting in focusing of
the beam with its narrowest part a distance from the probe.
Combining the steering in B and C will result in a focussed
beam that sweeps across the sector, as in the moving image
above.
Resulting Ultrasound beam as shown by a computer simulation,
focusing due to the concave wavefront created by the dynamic
focusing. The wavelength is exaggerated for illustration
purposes. Image Courtesy of Hans Torp.
Focusing is illustrated above. In a mechanical probe, there may be several transducers, arranged in a circular
array, focusing the beam in a manner analogous to that shown in fig. 7c. In a circular array, however, the
focusing can be done in all directions transverse to the beam direction, i.e. in the imaging plane and transverse
to the plane, while a linear array can only focus in one direction, in the imaging plane.
Annular focusing in all directions both in plane and transverse to the plane.
Linear focusing in the imaging plane only.
A matrix array, can focus in both directions at the same plane.
The focusing increases the concentration of the energy at the depths where the beam is focussed, so the energy
in each part of the tissue has to be calculated according to both wavelength, transmission and focusing to ensure
that the absorbed energy stays within safe limits.
Lateral resolution
The apparent width of the scatterer in the image is more or less given by the lateral resolution of the beam. (The
thickness in the axial direction is determined by the depth resolution, i.e. the pulse length as discussed above).
In addition, two echoes within one beam, will only be separated by the difference in depth.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
20 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
The lateral resolution of a beam is
dependent on the focal depth, the wavelength
and probe diameter (aperture) of the
ultrasound probe.
(Reproduced from Hans Torp by
permission)
Two points in a sector that is to be scanned. The ultrasound scan will smear the points out
according to the lateral resolution in each
beam.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
21 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Thus a small scatterer will appear to be
"smeared out", and the apparent size in
the image is determined by the beam
width and pulse length. As the pulse
length is less than the beam width, the
object will
be "smeared out" most in the lateral
direction.
Two scatterers at the same depth,
separated laterally by less than the
beam width, will appear as one.
Two scatterers at different depths will
appear separate if separated by more
than the pulse length.
But, if separate
depth, they will
same line, if lat
the beam.
Thus:
The larger the aperture, the higher the resolution of a line. However, the crucial limitation is the ability to
place the aperture between the ribs. Too big probe footprint will reduce the effective aperture again,
resulting in reduced resolution.
The shorter the wavelength (the higher the frequency), the better the resolution. The limitation for the
frequency is the required depth penetration.
Line density
The width of the echo will be determined by the beam width, and thus the distance between the beams (most
ultrasound scanners today will intrapolate between beams if the distance between the beams is greater than the
beam width). Ideally, the distance between the beam width should be the same as the beam width at the focal
depth, for maximal resolution, thus lateral resolution of a beam determining the line density. This means that
the line density would be suited to the beam width. This, however, holds only for a linear array.
In a sector angle, the line density falls with distance from the probe, as the lines diverge.
However, as the beam width also increases at depths greater than the focal depth, the ideal line density for a
sector probe is the one where beam distances are equal to the beam width at the focal depth. This will give the
best lateral resolution. A line density that is so high as to make lines overlap, will not result in increased lateral
resolution. A line density that leaves gaps between the lines, will have less than optimal lateral resolution as
determined by the probe aperture and focal depth.
But as the time it takes to build each line in the image for any given depth that is desired, the number of beams
in an image limits the frame rate. And if a greater sector width is desired without reducing the frame rate, the
line density is reduced (same number of lines over a wider angle).
Thus, the line density itself is limited by other factors as well:
Frame rate (including the depth).
Sector width. Increasing sector width has to be compensated either by lower frame rate or by lower line
density (keeping the same number of lines in a wider sector) as shovn below. And in addition, as the
sector width is increasing by depth, the line density falls correspondingly.
Due to these factors, the line density often falls below the theoretically desirable described above, and the line
density, not the probe size and wavelength becomes the limiting factor for the lateral resolution.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
22 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Two different lateral resolutions, the speckles can be seen to be "smeared". In this case the loss of resolution in the right image is due to low
should appear as split in different lines as indicated in the middle, as each beam is separated, line density being less than optimal relative to
interpolated beween lines. This reduction in line density is done to achieve a higher frame rate, as illustrated below.
So a distinction should be made between the lateral beam resolution, given by the fundamental properties of the
system, and the image resolution that is a compromise between the requirements of frame rate, angle width and
depth.
The discussion may be extended, yaking all issues into consideration:
A: Beam width. Speckles (true
speckles: black) are smeared
out across the whole beam
width ( Apparent speckles dark
grey, top). This means that with
this beam width the speckles
from to different layers cannot
be differentiated, and layer
specific motion cannot be
B: Line density. Only the
lines in the ultrasound
beams (black) are
detected, and can be
tracked, beams between
lines are not detected or
tracked. The spaces
between lines cannot be
seen in the final image
C: Divergence of lines in the
depth due to the sector image
will both increase beam width
and decrease line density in the
far field. this may result in the
line density and width being
adequate (in this example for
two layer tracking) in the near
field, but inadequate in the far
D: Focussing. The beams being focussed at a
certain depth mau mean that line density may
inadequate at the focus depth. Thus speckles i
some layers may be missed. IN general, the
default setting will usually give the best line
density at the focus depth, so unless frame rat
is increased, this problem may be minor.
Howewever, line density will decrease ifalso if
sector width is increased, there is a given
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
23 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
tracked. due to image lateral
smoothing.
field, situation there being
analoguous to A.
number of lines for a given frame rate and
depth. In any case, in the far field, the beams w
be broader, and the beam width will be more li
A and C.
Thus, the line density can be increased by
Reducing the sector width (gives higher line density by spreading the lines over a smaller angle)
1.
Reducing frame rate (enables time for builing more lines between frames)
2.
Reducing depth (enables a higher line density for a given frame rate, as the shorter lines takes shorter
time to build).
3.
This is discussed in detail below:
Temporal resolution (frame rate):
To imagine moving objects, structures such as blood and heart, the frame rate is important, related to the motion
speed of the object. The eye generally can only see 25 FPS (video frame rate), giving a temporal resolution of
about 40 ms. However, a higher frame rate and new equipment offers the possibility of replay at lower rate, f.i.
50 FPS played at 25 FPS, which will in fact double the effective resolution of the eye.
In quantitative measurement, whether based on the Doppler effect or 2D B-mode data, sufficient frame rate is
important to avoid undersampling. In Doppler, the frame rate is also important in the Nykvist phenomenon.
The temporal resolution is limited by the sweep speed of the beam. And the sweep speed is limited by the
speed of sound, as the echo from the deepest part of the image has to return before the next pulse is sent out ad
a different angle in the neighboring beam.
Depth
If the desired depth is reduced, the time from sending to receiving the pulse is reduced, and the next pulse (for
the next beam) can be sent out earlier, thus increasing sweep speed and frame rate, as shown below.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
24 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
As the depth of the sector determines the time before next
pulse can be sent out, higher depth results in longer time for
building each line, and thus longer time for building the sector
from a given number of lines, i.e. lower frame rate.
Thus reducing the desired depth of the sector results in shorter time
between pulses, and thus shorter time for building each line, shorter
time for building the same number of lines, i.e. higher frame rate. In
this case, the depth has been halved, and the time for building a line is
also halved.
For a depth of 15 cm, this means that the time for building one line will be 2 x 0.15 m / 1540 m/s = 0.19 ms.
The frame rate is then given by the depth and the number of lines, which again is a function of sector width and
line density.
The important point of this, is that reducing the depth to the field of interest will give a higher frame rate, that
can either be used for higher temporal resolution, or for increased spatial resolution or sector width (see later).
Looking at commercial scanners, the effect of reducing depth is often surprisingly little, this may be due to the
manufacturers automatically using the increased temporal capacity to increase line density rather than frame
rate.
Still, the field of view should be limited to the field of interest. In practice, when studying the ventricles, the
atria should be excluded.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
25 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
In this case, in the image to the left, the depth has been halved, reducing the time for building each line to half, thus also halving the
Number of beams: Sector width and line density.
The sweep speed can also be increased by reducing the number of beams for a full sector. Reducing the number
of lines in the image will reduce the time for building up the whole image. This can be achieved by either
decreasing the sector angle (width), but keeping the line density, i.e. reducing the field of view but keeping
lateral resolution. Decreasing the line density, but keeping the same sector angle will achieve the same increase
in frame rate, but reduce lateral resolution.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
26 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Fig.7a. A sector with a given depth, sector width and line density determines the frame rate.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
27 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
b. Reducing sector width, but maintaining the line density, gives unchanged lateral resolution but higher
frame rate, at the cost of field of view.
c. Reducing the line density instead and
lateral resolution, and gives the same in
As can be seen there has always to be a trade off. Frame rate is a compromise between sector size (width and
depth), resolution (line density) and frame rate. Line density is a trade off with frame rate and sector width. The
fundamental limitation is the speed of sound. In the example above for a depth of 12 cm (givig at time for
building one line of 15 ms), with 64 lines, the time for a full sector is 64 x 0.19 ms = 12.5 ms, and the frame rate
is 1000 / (12.5) = 80.
This is shown in the example below:
Ultrasound acquisitions of the same ventricle at frame rate 34 ( left), 56 (middle) and 112 (right), all other setting being equal.
Increased frame rate is achieved by reducing the number of lines; i.e. the line density. This can be seen as an increasing width of
the speckles in the image with increasing frame rate, resulting in a lateral blurring of the image. The first step from 34 to 56
seems to retain an acceptable image quality, indicating that the line density was redundant at the lowest frame rate. ( In fact, it
may seem that the image in the middle has the best quality, as the left image seems more grainy. But the graininess is the real
appearance of the echoes, while the more homogeneous appearance in the middle and the left is due to smearing). However, as
line density decreases toward the bottom of the sector (by the divergence of the lines), the effect is mos clearly seen here, i.e. in
the atrial walls, the mitral ring and valve. In the image to the right, the endocardial definition is lost. As it is the echoes that are
smeared, the effect will result in an apparent decreased cavity size.
These images also illustrates the drawback of time gain compensation, all three images has the same TGC, showing about the
same brightness of the walls from base to apex, (the attenuation being offset by the TGC), but with increasing cavity noise.
Multiple line acquisition (MLA)
However, a method for increasing the frame rate for a given sector and line density, is to fire a wide transmit
beam, and listen on more narrow receiver beams (crystals) simultaneously. This is called multiple line
acquisition (MLA), and is illustrated below:
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
28 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
In this example, a wide beam is fired, and for each of the four transmit beams, there are four receiver beams (4MLA). thus, the
frame rate is increased fourfold for the same number of lines.
However, simultaneous reception from neighboring lines will result in some contamination of the signals from
lateral beams, in addition it will increase the effect of side lobes. This is limited especially in B-mode, where
image quality is the main focus. There will be interference beween the simultaneous receiver beams, creating a
line pattern, reducing image quality. Smoothing this in the image will result in "smearing", and thus give much of
the effect seen by reducing line density, and thus there is less gain in the MLA technique. In tissue Doppler, the
image quality is of less concern, as the main emphasis is on velocity data, rather than image quality. Thus, the
MLA factor, and hence, the frame rate of tissue Doppler is thus usually higher, but at the cost of lower lateral
resolution. This may not be apparent, unless one compares data across the beams. An example can be seen
here.
3D ultrasound
3D ultrasound increases complexity a lot, resulting in a new set of additional challenges.
The number of crystals need to be increased, typically from between 64 and 128 to between 2000 and 3000.
However, the probe footprint still needs to be no bigger than being able to fit between the ribs. And the aperture
size must still be adequate for image resolution.
The number of data channels increases also by the square, from 64 to 642
= 4096. This means that the
transmission capacity of the probe connector needs to be substatially increased, and some processing has to
take place in the probe itself to reduce number of transmission channels. .
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
29 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
The number of lines also increase by the square of the number for 2D, given the same line density, meaning
that each plane shall have the same number of lines, and a full volume then shall be n=built by the same
number of planes. This means that given 64 lines per plane, the number of planes should be 64, which means a
total of 64 x 64 = 4096 lines. This means that the frame rate (usually termed the "volume rate" in 3D imaging),
will be 0.19 ms x 4096 = 778 ms, or about 0.8 secs. Meaning about 1 volume per heartbeat for a heart rate of
75. This is illustrated below.
Building a 2D sector with lines. (Even though each line (and the sector) has a
definite thickness, this is usually not considered in 2D imaging, except in
beamforming for image quality.
Building a 3D volume. Each plane has the same number
the left, and takes as long to build. The number of plane
each plane. Here is shown only the building of the first
the time spent on each of the following planes are in pro
volume is then equal to the square of the number of line
This means that full volume 3D ultrasound has to pay a price of a substantially reduction in both frame rate and
line density (resolution) at the same time. Thus, the lateral resolution is poor in 3D acquisition compared to 2D
acquisition.
Possible compensations are:
MLA technique, as the MLA gating will reduce the time used for each plane, and if used in both coordinates
(lateral and azimuth) it will reduce the time by the square of the MLA factor. Still, present technique have
increased the volume rate only to about 5 volumes per second for a full sector covering the heart.
Gated acquisition (stitching). In ECG gated mode, only a part of the sector is taken in one heartbeat, allowing a
higher line density as well as higher number of planes in the partial sector. Next part of the sector is than taken
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
30 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
in the next heartbeat, and the two volumes are aligned by ECG gating. This is illustrated below.
Gated volume acquisition (stitching). In this case of four heartbeats. Only one fourth of the full volume is taken in one
heartbeat, so the full heartbeat is used for increased number of lines and planes, as well as shortening the time for the acquisition
of the partial volume. In the next heartbeat, the next fourth of the volume is acquired, and so on acquiring a full volume in four
heartbeats. The four partial volumes are then aligned by ECG gating into one reconstructed volume, and the reconstructed
volume thus has the same volume rate as the four partial volumes.
Thus, the limitation in 3D sector size can be used both for more lines (resolution) and increased volume rate.
However, the reconstructed acquisition is no longer real time.
The disadvantage of this is that each full-volume heart cycle is constructed from multiple beats, and small
movements, f.i. by respiration may result in mis alignment of wall segments. The acquisition is thus usually
taken in a breathold, and thus there is a practical limitation to the number of beats that can be stitched. Usually
four to six are used, six being at the limit for many patients. Four beats, by most vendors now will result in a
volume rate of around 20 VPS.
Any small movement will result in mis alignment of the sub volumes, with a sharp boundary within the volume
where there is both spatial and temporal discontinuity (stitching artefact).
Volume acquisition can then be displayed as either a surface rendering, or multiple section planes through the
volume.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
31 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
3D acquisition of a ventricle with inferior infarct. The display is shown as the apical planes to the left, and nine cross sectional
planes to the right, going from the apex (top left) to the base (bottom right - reading order). The infarct can be seen as
inferoseptal a - to dyskinesia in the basal sections. The image also illustrates that the software can be enabled to track the
planes, thus eliminating out of plane artefacts when evaluating wall motion. Note that there is drop outs that cannot be
eliminated by moving the imaging plane, in the anterior wall. Image courtesy of Dr. A. Thorstensen .
Some advantages of 3D echo is:
Display of morphology, especially mitral leaflets (resolution not good enough for aortic from the apical
position), this is vastly improved by 3D TEE.
Volume measurement. A good 3D volume eliminates foreshortening that may be masked by moving the
probe in separate 2D planes. Some studies have shown better validity and reproducibility by 3D than 2D,
although poorer feasibility.
Regional wall motion assessment, especially in the base. Basal segments may move due to tethering, even
if there is no intrinsic function. On the other hand, normal segments may display apparent dyskinesia die
to out of plane motion, especially in the inferior wall. Assessing wall motion in cross sections, is visually
easier. Also, wall thickening, as different from wall motion, may be easier to see in the cross sections.
artifacts:
Shadows
Both air and bone will attenuate the ultrasound beam almost totally, thus creating a shadow. However, a shadow
has different effects depending on the distance from the probe. A distant shadow will simply create a drop out
behind the shadowing object. On the other hand, a shadow close to the probe will simply reduce the effective
aperture, thus not creating a drop out, but instead reducing the lateral resolution. The principle is illustrated
below.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
32 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Illustration of effects of shadows on an ultrasound beam. Left: no shadow. Middle, a shadow distant from the beam (e.g. a calcification or th
shadow with no image below it. Left a shadow close to the transducer surface (e.g. lung edge or rib) will result in a narrow beam (reduced a
shadow in the picture, but rather a reduced lateral resolution. (Original simulation image to the left courtesy of Hans Torp, modifications by
of the shadows in the images is shown below, indicated by the green arrows.
Left, shadow originating at a depth of ca 3 cm, as can seen by the visible structures of the chest wall
closer to the probe. The shadow is probably due to the edge of the lung. Right; a small repositioning of
the probe solves the problem.
Left shadow originating close to
of a costa. It can be seen as a s
resolution in the shadow, and ag
the problem as seen to the right
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
33 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
more pronounced drop out of the anterior wall in this 2-chamber view due to a lung shadow distant from
the probe. However, the lateral resolution may be seen to be reduced at the basal part of the border
between the picture and the shadow.
Reduced lateral resolution due t
and shadows will vary, accordin
the patient was extremely thin,
the probe and the costa. In this
costa was to the left in the imag
If the near shadow is in the centre of the probe, the result may be that the beam is split in two, resulting in
two apparent apertures. The effect on the image is shown below.
Split image due to two virtual ap
middle of the probe footprint.
Reverberations:
Reverberations is defined as the sound remaing in a particular space after the original sound pulse has passed.
Thus, a single echo is a reverberation (first order), and multiple echoes will be higher order reverberations as
illustrated below.
the phenomenon that a sound pulse bounce back between different structures before being reflected back to the
observer. , while in ultrasound iomages the term is usually restricted to artefacts caused by the echo bouncing
more times (higher order reverberations) , creating false images
The phenomenon of thunder is a typical reverberation effect:
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
34 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Reverberations: Simplified animation of thunder. The sound of lightning is a short, sharp crack. The wavefront of that sound
(red) reaches the listener first, but the wavefront is then reflected from different cloud surfaces with different distance to the
listener as secondary echoes, ( primary reverberations; blue and green), an also tertiary echo (Secondary reverberation; yellow)
and even higher orders. Thus, the crack is "smeared out" to a long lasting rumble.
In ultrasound imaging, actually the primary echoes are first order reverberations. However, in ultrasound images
the term is usually restricted to artefacts caused by the echo bouncing more times (higher order reverberations) ,
creating false images as the partial delay due to multiple reflections will be interpreted as images at greater and
different depths. One of the most typical phenomenons are the stationary reverberations caused by the bouncing
of the pulse between a structure close to the surface, and the probe surface:
Stationary reverberations are caused by stationary structures, usually in the chest wall, causing the ultrasound to
bounce back and forth between the skin and the structure, increasing the time before the echo returns and
giving rise to a false image of an apparent stationary structure deeper down.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
35 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Left, the principle of stationary reverberations, showing how the ultrasound pulse bounces twice between a stationary structure
in the body wall and the surface (thick line), causing the reflected pulse to arrive the transducer three times as late as if it hadn't
bounced (dotted, thick line). This is then interpreted as the reflector being located three times it's true depth. Right, the
appearance in grey scale image, see the stationary echo in the lateral wall (arrows).
Reverberations needs not necessarily be totally stationary, if the reflecting surface that gives rise to the echo
moves, the reverberations will move as well.
Also, the echoes may be scatered in all directions, the pulse may bounce in different directions (as in the
thunder animation above) before part of the reflected pulse reaches the probe. This will not give a distinct echo
like the one above, but rather more diffuse, less dense shadows, as in the example below:
By first glance, this image seems to have OK image quality. The endocardium seems well defined around most of the wall.
However, the lateral wall shows good definition mostly in the latter half of the cycle. And shadowy reverberations can be seen
in both base and midwall.
Shadowy reverberations may seem of little importance, as the B-mode often is faily well visualised anyway.
This is partluy duye to the motion, and partly due to the second harmonic mode, which reduces the amplitude of
reverberation noise, but only in the B-mode, as tissue Doppler must be done in fundamental mode due to the
Nykvist limit.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
36 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
The impact of reverberations on tissue Doppler are discussed below, on strain rate imaging by tissue Doppler in
the measurements section, and on speckle trackingin the measurements section here and here.
Stationary echoes and noise is also referred to as "clutter". This noise may also result in a more random pattern
(shadowy reverberations), resulting in a more blurred picture.
Side Lobes
Each beam is not solely concentrated in the main beam as illustrated above. In addition, some of the energy is
dispersed in side lobes originating among other things from interference as illustrated below.
Simulated beam with focusing, showing interference pattern dispersing
some of the beam to the sides. (image courtesy of Hans Torp).
Side lobes from a single focussed ultrasound beam.
These side lobes will also generate echoes from a
scatterer hit by the ultrasound energy in the side
lobes, i.e. outside the main beam.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
37 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
As echoes from a scatterer in the side lobe pathway is perceived coming from the main beam, this will result in
a false echo, apparent from the main beam..
AS the beam with side lobes sweeps back and forth a cross the sector, each echo from the scatterer in both the
main beam and the side lobes will generate the false echo in the position of the main beam.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
38 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
This again will result in the echo being smeared out across the sector, resulting in a smeared out echo across a
large part of the sector.
Side lobes originating from the fusion line of the aortic cusps, seen to extend
into both the LV cavity and the aortic root cavity (arrows).
As opposed to reverberations, the side lobes moves with the s
may change with time (in this case the echo intensity of the fu
decreases as the valve opens, and thus the intensity of the sid
As opposed to reverberations, the side lobes will move as well as increase and decrease in intensity in parallel
with the source of the echo as shown below.
An image riddled with side lobes. Again they can be seen to move in the axial direction with the structures they are originating
from. (The echo in the middle of the right ventricle cavity is an ICD lead, and not an artifact.)
Angle dependency
In M-mode imaging, the angle between the motion direction and the ultrasound beam may lead to a distortions
as explained below:
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
39 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Angle dependency as seen by M-mode. As a reflector moves from a to b in the direction 1, the true motion (displacement) is L1.
If the ultrasound beam deviates from the direction of the motion by the angle , the apparent length along the ultrasound beam
will be L2, which is the hypothenuse of the triangle, and thus L2 = L1 / cos ( ). Thus angle deviation of M-mode measures will
always over estimate the real motion (as opposed to Dopller measurements).
Foreshortening
For correct display of the left ventricle, the imaging plane has to transect the apex. This is ensured by finding
the apex beat by palpation. However, the apex does not necessarily offer the optimal window for imaging, and
the intercostal space above may give a better view. However, this may lead to a geometrical distortion as
illustrated below:
Apical position of the probe. The two orthogonal planes can be
seen to bisect the apex.
Foreshortening by erroneous placement of the probe. The two
orthogonal planes can be seen to bisect the wall, not the apex.
In one plane this will not be evident, as the intersecting wall still shows
an ellipsoid shape.
This is shown in the images below:
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
40 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Foreshortening. The three images are taken with identical gain, compress and reject settings. Left: correct apical position,
showing the apex in the centre of the sector. The wall vivibility is poor. MIddle: by moving the probe one intercostal space higher,
the wall visibility becomes much better. However, the ventricle canbe seen to be foreshortened, being much shorter than in the
left image. But this is only evident by the comparison, without the reference image to the left, this is not apparent, as the
(virtual) apex is in the centre of the sector. However, rotationg the probe to the two-chamber posisition, reveals that the apex in
fact is not in the centre at all, thus the four chamber image is foreshortened.
The foreshortened image in four chamber view may seem to be better, at least for wall motion assessment, but
the consequences may be:
Volumes and LV length will be underestimated (I've seen diagnosed bi atrial enlargement due to
foreshortening simply because the normal atria looked bigger in relation to the foreshortened ventricle)
The apex is not imaged, and any apical abnormalities will be missed as seen below:
Stress echo image at peak stress. The foreshortened image to the left shows good wall visibility, and apparent normal wall
motion in all segments. Left: correct placement of the probe as seen by the slighty longer ventricle, shows poorer visibility, but
the akinetic apicolateral part of the wall is evident, showing how foreshortening may almost totally mask any abnormality in the
apex (Although some asynchrony may be seen).
The anterior wall is partly apical and partly circumferential. Thus longitudinal shortening, especially by
speckle tracking may be circumferential rather than longitudinal. This may also be related to the
curvature dependency of strain as measured by speckle tracking.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
41 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Non linear wave propagation and harmonic imaging.
Non linear propagation of the signal in the body, leads to distortion of the waves in the signal. But this again
leads to a dispersion of the wavelength content in the signal, as assessed by Fourier analysis in the received
signal.
Non-linear propagation. The upper panel shows the waveform of a pulse as originally transmitted, and after 6 mm transmission through
tissue. The lower panels shows how the energy distribution is shifted to a more evenly distribution between more frequencies. (image
courtesy of Hans Torp).
By Fourier analysis it is thus possible to send at half the frequency (typical 1.7 MHz as opposed to 3.4 MHz in
native imaging), but receive at the same frequency (the second harmonic frequency: Twice the frequency is one
octave higher). Thus, it improves penetration, which is important especially in obese subjects, while it retains
the resolution (almost).
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
42 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Fourier analysis of the resulting signal in native frequency (left)
and second harmonic mode (left) shows that the native signal
contains much more energy at all depth, while the harmonic signal
contains most of the energy at a certain depth, in this case at the
level of the septum, showing a much better signal-to-noise ratio.
(image courtesy of Hans Torp).
Energy distribution of the signal from cavity (lower curve) and septum (upper c
showing the same phenomenon as the middle picture. The difference between ca
signal (being mostly clutter) and tissue is small in the native frequency domain (
but there is little clutter at the harmonic frequency (3.4 MHz). Thus, filtering the
signal will reduce clutter, as shown below. (image courtesy of Hans Torp).
The noise from clutter and aberrations is mainly in the primary frequency, so the use of second harmonic will
suppress noise, improving the noise-to-signal ratio. Also, the echoes from the side lobes are mainly in the
primary frequency and will be reduced in second harmonic imaging.
Thus second harmonic imaging leads to:
1: Reduced noise and side lobe artifacts
2: Improved depth penetration.
Examples of the effect of harmonic imaging can be seen below.
The same image in harmonic (left) and fundamental (right) mode, showing
the improved signal-to-noise ratio in harmonic imaging, especially in rducing
noise from the cavity. (Thanks to Eirik Nestaas for correcting my left-right
confusion in this image text)
Stationary reverberation in harmonic (left) and fundamental (
showing the effect of harmonic imaging on clutte
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
43 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
However, due to the increase in pulse length with lower frequency, harmonic imaging also leads to:
3: Thicker echoes from speckles as discussed above.
Fundamental (left) and harmonic (right) images of the left ventricle at the level of the chorda tendineae. The echo of the chorda
(blue arrow) can be seen to be thicker in harmonic imaging, due to the longer pulse length. The echo generates a side lobe that
can be seen to the right of the chorda. The side lobe is more prominent in fundamental than harmonic imaging. Note also the
reduction in cavity noise from the right and left ventricle in the harmonic image.
However, halving the transmit frequency will also halve the Nykvist limit, and thus is less suited to Doppler
imaging as will be discussed below.
Speckle formation:
The gray scale image is seen to consist of a speckled pattern. The pattern is not the actual image of the
scatterers in the tissue itself, but the interference pattern generated by the reflected ultrasound:
Interference pattern. Here is simulated two wave sources or
scatterers at the far field (white points). The emitted or reflected
waves are seen to generate a speckle pattern (oval dots) as the
amplitude is increased where wave crests cross each other, while
the waves are neutralised where a wave crest crosses a though.
This can be seen by throwing two stones simultaneously in still
water . The speckle pattern can be seen in front of the scatterers,
towards the probe.
Irregular interference pattern. This is generated by more scatterers
somewhat randomly distributed. The speckle pattern is thus
random too. Again there may be a considerable distance between
the speckles and the scatterers generating the pattern.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
44 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Speckle tracking
Humpback whale diving. Each humpback has an unique (speckle) pattern on the underside of the tail (and flukes). Thus each
individual can be identified by its speckle pattern. Photographs at different times and places can thus track the wandering of
each individual all over the area it wanders, without recourse to anything else than the pattern. - Speckle tracking! This is thus a
method with low frame rate, giving mainly the extent of wandering over a long time period (the sampling interval). To measure
swimming velocity, a Doppler sonar would have been useful.
The speckle pattern can be used to track myocardial motion due to two facts about the speckle pattern.
1. The randomness of the speckle pattern ensures that each region of the myocardium has its own unique
speckle pattern: that can differentiate a region from other regions (just as in the whales).
Principle of speckle tracking. Demonstrating the difference between two different regions of the myocardium by their different
random speckle pattern. The two enlarged areas show completely different speckle patterns, which is due to the randomness of
the interference. This creates an unique pattern for any selected region that can identify this region and hence, the displacement
of the region in the next frame.
2. The speckle pattern remains reasonably stable, and the speckles follow the myocardial motion. This can be
demonstrated by M-mode:
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
45 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
An M-mode along the septum demonstrates how the speckles is shown as motion curves. It is evident that many speckles are only visible during par
but if the speckle pattern is compared from frame to frame, the changes will be small. The grainy texture of the lines is due to the limited frame rate
right is reconstructed from the 2D image at the left. When the speckle pattern is followed by an M-mode in the wall, the alternating bright and dark p
alternating bright and dark lines. The lines remaining to a large degree unbroken, shows the pattern to be relatively stable, the speckles moving alon
myocardial motion, and thus myocardial motion can be tracked by the speckles.
By this, defining a region (kernel) in one frame, this kernel can be identified as region in the next frame with the
same size and shape with the most similar speckle pattern, and the motion of the kernel can be tracked from
frame to frame.
Speckle tracking. Real time M-mode demonstrates how
the speckle pattern follows the myocardial motion.
(Remark how this image is not grainy, due to the high
frame rate of real time M-mode).
Defining a kernel in the myocardium
will define a speckle pattern within
(red). Within a defined search area (
blue), the new position of the kernel in
the next frame (green) can be
recognised by finding the same speckle
pattern in a new position. The
movement of the kernel (thick blue
arrow) can then be measured.
Speckle tracking search algorithm. The kernel is
defined in the original frame at t=0 (red square). In
the next frame, at t=t, the algorithm defines a searc
area (white square), and the search is conducted in
all directions for the matching kernel.
Thus, speckle tracking is basically pattern recognition, identifying an area (kernel) in one frame, and then
tracking by identifying the kernel with the best match in the next frame.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
46 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Thus, the kernel can be tracked from frame to frame as illustrated here
The algorithm for this seas is simple, it simply searches for the area with the smallest difference in the total sum
of pixel values, the smallest sum of absolute differences (SAD). This has been shown to be as effective as cross
correlation (26, 27). However, the speckle pattern will not repeat perfectly. This is due to both true out of plane
motion (rotation and torsion relative to apical planes and longitudinal deformation relative to short axis planes)
and to small changes in the interference pattern. But the frame to frame change is small, and the approach to
recognition is statistical. This means, however, that the search should be done from frame to frame, the changes
over longer time intervals will be to great.
More about the mathematics can be found here.
In principle, pure speckle tracking is direction independent, and can track crosswise. However, lateral
resolution is important in delineating the speckles in the lateral direction. If the lateral resolution is low, the
interpolation will result in a "smeared" picture, with speckles that are nor so easily tracked in the lateral
direction. In addition the lateral resolution decreases in depth with sector probes.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
47 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
LOngitudinal speckle tracking in apical 4 chamber view. The
resulting tracking of the kernels shown in motion. As can be seen,
with a drop out apicolateral, this ROI tracks less than perfect,
giving too low strain both in LA and MA segments.
Speckle tracking can be applied crosswise. In this parasternal long
axis view, the myocardial motion is tracked both in axial and
transverse (longitudinal) direction. It is evident that the tracking is
far poorer in the inferior wall, due to the poor lateral resolution at
greater depth.
However, drop outs and reverberations will affect the tracking, and in the lateral direction, low lateral resolution
will "smear" the speckles in the lateral direction, making tracing less perfect, as can be seen in the parasternal
long axis image above. It also means that the lateral tracking will be poorer with increasing depth (as the lines
diverge as well as becoming wider), as also discussed in the measurements section.
The speckle pattern will not repeat perfectly. This is due to both true out of plane motion (rotation and torsion
relative to apical planes and longitudinal deformation relative to short axis planes) and to small changes in the
interference pattern. But the frame to frame change is small, and the approach to recognition is statistical, the
basic algorithms are shown here. Still, small inaccuracies in tracking may cause over all drift in the tracking, as
discussed more in detail in the measurement section.
Drift in ultrasound. As speckles disappear out of plane, or by changing interference pattern, this may cause less than perfect
tracking.
This means, however, that the with lower frame rate, the changes from frame to frame are greater, resulting in
poorer tracking. Higher heart rate (f.i. in stress) will result in the same, as the number of frames per cycle will be
reduced, i.e. lower relative frame rates.
Thus: speckle tracking is frame rate sensitive:
Too low frame rate will result in too great changes from frame to frame, resulting in poor tracking. This
may also limit the use in high heart rates, as the motion and thus frame to frame change increases relative
to the frame rate.
1.
Too high frame rate is obtained by reduced lateral resolution, and thus resulting in poorer tracking at least
in the transverse direction.
2.
Thus, both too high and too low frame rate may affect speckle tracking adversely. With the present equipment,
the optimal frame rate seems to be between 40 - 70 if image quality is good, slightly higher with poorer image
quality.
As speckle tracking can track in both transverse and axial directions, with a sufficient number of kernels,
deformation can in principle be measured in two dimensions, as as discussed in the section about a new
application called "2D strain".
It's also important in dealing with applications to realise that not all apparent tracking is true speckle tracking,
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
48 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
some of themotion seen in the image may be due to an advanced algorithm using information from other parts
of the image:
False speckle tracking. This is due to the algorithm using motion data from the mitral ring, distributing it along the ROI in a kind
of "model" of the motion for smoothing, in order to reduce the imapact of drift and other sources of noise. As can be seen, in this
image it "tracks" even if there are no speckles. This, however, is not true tracking, the bullets move according to the model
calculating where they should be
This is discussed more in the measurements section.
Within its limitations, however, speckle tracking can be used for measuring displacement, velocity, strain and
strain rate as described below.
The Doppler effect
Christian Andreas Doppler
(1803 - 1853)
My cat Doppler
(2004 -
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
49 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
The Doppler effect was discovered by Christian Andreas Doppler (1803 - 1853), and shows how the frequency
of an emitted wave changes with the velocity of the emitter or observer. The theory was presented in the royal
Bohemian society of Science in 25th of May1842 (5 listeners at the occasion!), and published in 1843 (119).
The premises for his theoretical work was faulty, as he built his theory on the work of James Bradley who
erroneously attributed the apparent motion of stars against the background (parallax effect) to the velocity of
the earth in its orbit (instead of the effect of Earth's position in orbit on the angle of observation). Further,
Doppler attributed the differences in colour of different stars to be due to the Doppler effect, assuming all stars
to be white. Finally, he theoretised over the effect of the motion of double stars that rotate around each other,
assuming a Doppler effect from the motion. The changes in wavelength from the Doppler effect, however, is
too small to be observed.
However, Doppler did a theoretical derivation of the effect of the motion of the source or observer on the
perceived wavelength from the premises of a constant propagation velocity of the waves in the medium, and
this is entirely correct, valid both for sound waves and electromagnetic radiation of all kinds. The basis for the
Doppler effect is that the propagation velocity of the waves in a medium is constant, so the waves propagates
with the same velocity in all directions, and thus there is no addition of the velocity of the waves and the
velocity of the source. Thus, as the source moves in the direction of the propagation of the waves, this does not
increase the propagation velocity of the waves, but instead increases the frequency.The original derivation of
the Doppler principle as well as the extension to reflected waves is explained in more detail here. As a work of
theoretical physics, it is thus extremely important. In addition, it has become of practical importance, as the
basis for the astronomical measurement of the velocity of galaxies by the red shift of the spectral lines, in
Doppler radar, Doppler laser and Doppler ultrasound.
The theory was experimentally validated by the Dutchman Christoph Hendrik Diderik Buys Ballot (120), with
the Doppler effect on sound waves, who placed musicians along a railway line and on a flatbed truck, all
blowing the same note, and observed by subjects with absolute pitch, who observed the tones being a half note
higher when the train was approaching as compared to the stationary musicians, and a half note lower as the
train receded.
(This can be observed in everyday phenomena such as the sound of f.i. an ambulance siren, the pitch
(frequency) is higher when the ambulance is coming towards the observer, hanging as it passes, and lower as it
goes away.
This is illustrated below:
The Doppler effect. As the velocity of sound in air (or any other medium ) is constant, the sound wave will propagate outwards in all
directions with the same velocity, with the center at the point where it was emitted. As the engine moves, the next sound wave is emitted
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
50 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
from a point further forward, i.e. with the center a little further forward. Thus the distance between the wave crests is decreased in the
direction of the motion, and increased in the opposite direction. As the distance between the wave crests is equal to the wavelength,
wavelength decreases (i.e. sound frequency increases) in front of the engine, and increases (sound frequency decreases) behind it. This
effect can be heard, as the pitch of the train whistle is higher coming towards a listener than moving away, changing as it passes. The
effect on the pitch of the train whistle was published directly, but later than Doppler and Buys Ballot.
If the sound source is stationary, the effect on moving observer is similar. The train will meet the wave crest
with shorter intervals, as the train moves into the incoming sound. In ultrasound, the wave is sent from a
stationary transducer, the moving blood or muscle is firstly moving towards the transducer and then following
the reflected wave towards the transducer, thus the Doppler shift is approximately twice as great. In the case of
reflected ultrasound, the Doppler shift is:
Angle deviation in Doppler:
For motion mesured in the same direction as the sound propagation. However, ultrasound, being high frequency,
behaves more like beams, as explained in the beginning, there may be an angle between the direction of the
motion and the ultrasound beam. This means that the angle deviation will result in a change in the measured
velocity, but in this care the angle deviation results in an underestimation of velocity by the cosine of the angle
deviation.
Left: distance along the axis x, imagined along the ultrasound beam y where is the angle between the
direction of the motion and the ultrasound beam (insonation angle).. The angle effect is:
This means that motion along an M-mode line will increase by the cosine of the angle deviation. This is
explained above. The angle deviation gives an increase in wavelength, similar to the increase in distance:
Frequency of ultrasound is the inverse of wavelength, so:
thus:
and:
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
51 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Thus, in the case of reflected ultrasound, the complete Doppler equation is:
where v is the blood or tissue velocity, c is the sound velocity in tissue, f0 is the transmitted frequency, fD is the
Doppler shift of reflected ultrasound and is the insonation angle, between the ultrasound beam and the
direction of motion (velocity vector).
Spectral analysis:
Analysis of the returned Doppler signal resolves the Doppler shift into the different frequencies, as well as the
amplitude for each spectrum. As shown above, the frequency is related to the different velocities.
Spectral analysis. The Doppler frequencies are distributed according to this frequency - amplitude diagram. The Tissue echoes has high
amplitude of the reflected signal, but low velocities (resulting in low Doppler frequencies). Blood has higher velocities 8with a wider
distribution), but lower amplitude. The signal is filtered. For Doppler flow, a high pass filter (low velocity reject) is applied to
suppress the tissue echoes. The filter is variable, and thus can be applied to select for v very high velocities in insufficiency jets. A low
pass filter (high velocity reject) can be applied to suppress noise above the velocity range. In tissue Doppler, the high pass filter can be
removed, or at least partially, to allow the low velocities from the tissue (usually on the order of 1/10 of flow). It can partially be
maintained to suppress absolutely stationary echoes, among other from the reverberations. The blood signal can be removed both by
reducing the gain, and by applying a low pas filter. For detailed explanation see below. Applied by me from Angelsen BA Ultrasound
imaging (117)
In the heart, the velocities are variable with time. Thus the velocity, or frequency shift is a function of time. At
the same time, the amplitude is a function of the velocities, as the velocities will be concentrated in a narrow
band. To display this, an approach similar to the M-mode can be applied. Amplitude is displayed as brightness,
in a manners similar to B.mode, while Frequency / Velocity are displayed on the y - axis and time on the x -
axis. This results in the typical Doppler flow velocity curves:
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
52 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Typical spectral flow curves. Left: Flow in the Left ventricular outflow, right in the mitral annulus. Velocities toward the probe
(positive Doppler shift) are shown as positive velocities, velocities away from the probe (negative Doppler shift) are shown as
negative velocities. The velocities are sampled at a certain depth by pulsed Doppler (see below). Thus, the velocity distribution is
limited to a fairly narrow band. Note the absence of velocities near zero, due to the high pass filter.
Width of the spectrum
As can be seen from the illustrations above, the velocity spectrum has a certain width. In the blood, this partly
reflects the spread of velocities between the multiple scatterers in the blood, as shown below:
Spectrum width. Left mitral flow, showing a fairly narrow spectrum band, indicating a relatively homogeneous velocity
distribution.
Right pulmonary venous flow, showing a wide distribution of velocities.
However, this is not the only explanation. As the bandwidth is a function of the pulse length as illustrated
above, spectral analysis will yield a spectrum that minimum is as wide as the bandwidth. Ideally, the pulse
length in Doppler should be long, in order to increase velocity resolution. However, this will reduce the spatial
(axial) resolution.
Thus, if the dispersion of velocities is larger than the bandwidth, as in flow measurements, this is the most
important. On the other hand, if there is little dispersion of velocities, as in tissue Doppler, the width of the
spectrum reflects the bandwidth.
But the insonation angle also has an influence, not only in the velocity measurement according to the Doppler
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
53 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
equation. but also in the bandwidth as shown below.
As can be seen, the direction of the motion of the scatterer in relation to the direction of the pulse, may influence the number of
oscillations that are actually used for measurement. Thus, a high insonation angle is equivalent to a virtual shortening of the pulse
length, and results in a wider bandwidth (spectrum).
Finally, stationary reverberations, creating artificially stationary echoes will result in widening of the spectrum
in tissue Doppler. In flow, this will basically be removed by the high pass filter.
Pulsed and continuous wave Doppler:
Doppler pulses can either be used as a pulsed Doppler, where a pulse is sent out, and the frequency shift in the
reflected pulse is measured after a certain time. This will correspond to a certain depth (range gating), i.e.
velocity is measured at a specific depth, which can be adjusted. The width is the same as the beam width, and
the length of the sample volume is equal to the length of the pulse. The same transducer is used both for
transmitting and receiving.
A problem in pulsed Doppler is that the Doppler shift is very small compared to the ultrasound frequency. This
makes it problematic to estimate the Doppler shift from a single pulse, without increasing the pulse length too
far. A velocity of 100 cm/s with a ultrasound frequency of 3.5 MHz results in a maximum Doppler shift of 2.3
KHz. The solution to this problem is shooting multiple pulses in the same direction and produce a new signal
with one sample from each pulse, the Doppler curve from this signal will be a new curve with the frequency
equal to the Doppler shift. (This means that a full package of pulses is considered one pulse in the sampling
frequency sense).
The pulsed modus results in a practical limit on the maximum velocity that can be measured. In order to
measure velocity at a certain depth, the next pulse cannot be sent out before the signal is returned. The Doppler
shift is thus sampled once for every pulse that is transmitted, and the sampling frequency is thus equal to the
pulse repetition frequency (PRF). Frequency aliasing occurs at a Doppler shift that is equal to half of the PRF.
fD = ½ * PRF
This is illustrated below with an analogy:
The Nykvist phenomenon.
The Nykvist phenomenon (121) is an effect of the relation between the sampling frequency and the observed
velocity. If you sample at a certain frequency, the direction of the motion becomes ambiguous, more frequent
sampling will give the correct direction, less frequent sampling results in an apparent motion in the opposite
direction. This can be observed with a stroboscopic light, for instance illuminating the flow of water, or with old
fashioned wagon wheels in old moves which often seem to revolve slowly backwards when the wagon moves
forwards.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
54 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
This is illustrated below.
Constant rotation velocity, decreasing sampling frequency:
The easiest is to show how reducing the sampling frequency affects the apparent motion. All circles rotate
with the same rotation velocity clockwise. The sampling frequency is reduced from left to right. It can be seen
that the red dots is at the same positions when they are seen to move.
a: 8:1
8 samples per rotation, the
red point is seen in eight
positions during the
rotation.
b: 4:1
4 samples per rotation, the
red point is seen to rotate
just as fast, but is only seen
in four positions
c: 2:1
2 samples per rotation, i.e. the
sampling frequency is exactly half
the rotation frequency. Here, the
red dot is only seen in two positions,
(but it is evident that it is in the
same positions at the same time as
in a and b). However, it is
impossible to decide which way it is
rotating. This is the Nykvist limit;
sampling rate = 1/2 rotation rate.
d: 1.5:1
1.5 samples per rotation,or
one sample per three quarter
rotation, making it seem that
the red dot is rotating counter
clockwise. Again, the dot is in
the same position at the same
time as in a and b.
Constant sampling frequency, increasing rotation velocity
The same principle applies when there is a fixed sampling frequency, but increasing rotational velocity. In the
images below, the frames are seen to shift simultaneously, but the positions of the red dots are different due to
the different rotational velocity.
a: 1:8
One rotation per 8 samples.
The sampling catches the
red dot in 8 positions during
one rotation.
b: 1:4
Rotation velocity twice that i
a; one rotation per four
samples, the sampling catches
the red dot only in four
positions during one rotation.
c: 1:2
Rotation velocity four times a; one
rotation per two samples, this catches
the red dot in only two positions,
giving directional ambiguity as above.
d: 1:1,5
Rotation velocity six times a;
one rotation per 1,5 samples, or
3/4 rotation per sample, giving
an apparent counter clockwise
rotation.
Sampling from increasing depth will increase the time for the pulse returning, thus increasing the sampling
interval and decrease the sampling frequency. The Nykvist limit thus decreases with depth. This means that
pulsed Doppler has depth resolution, but this leads to a limit to the velocities that can be measured.
The Nyquist limit is dependent on the depth (D) of the sampling volume. The larger distance from the probe,
the longer time for the pulse to pass to the desired depth and back, and the lower the Nyquist limit. The time
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
55 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
for the return of the pulse is:
T = 2D/c and the maximum PRF as PRF = c/2D
Thus, the maximum Doppler shift that can be measured is:
fD = c/4D (from: fD = ½ * PRF) and from the Doppler equation ( v = fD * c / 2f0) the maximum velocity
(Nyquist velocity vN):
vN = c2
/8Df0
Aliasing is no problem in pulsed tissue Doppler, as tissue velocities are far below the Nykvist limit.
However, in colour tissue Doppler, harmonic imaging is halving the effective frequency, and leads to
aliasing as shown below.
Continuous Doppler,
on the other hand, will measure all velocities along the ultrasound beam: The beam is transmitted continuously,
and the received echoes are sampled continuously with no range gating. Thus, there is no information about the
time interval from the signal to the reflection, and, hence, no information about the depth of the received signal;
the signal may come from any depth. The continuous Doppler has no Nykvist limit, and can measure maximal
velocities. It is used for measuring high velocities.
This means that both methods has limitations: pulsed Doppler has velocity ambiguity at high velocities, and
continuous wave Doppler has depth or range ambiguity. Thus, for continuous Doppler the pulse length can be
long, as there is no depth resolution, while in pulsed Doppler it has to be shorter in order to achieve a sufficient
depth resolution.
Examples of continuous wave versus pulsed wave, and the Nykvist effect. Left: Aortic insufficiency shown by cw Doppler. It van be
seen that there are a fair distribution of velocities in the whole spectrum. However, There are far more velocities blow 2 m/s. In this
case, the low pass filter is only set to suppress tissue velocities. If the point is to get a clear visualisation of the maximal velocities in
the jet, at 4 - 6 m/s, the filter should be set higher. Left, the same patient by pulsed Doppler of the LVOT. The outflow can be seen as a
narrow band, within the velocity range, while the regurgitant jet has velocities outside the Nykvist range, and there is total velocity
ambiguity.
High Pulse Repetition Frequency (HPRF)
A way around the problem, is to use high pulse repetition frequency pulsed Doppler. This means that one or
more new pulses are sent out before the echo from the desired depth of the first is received. This will increase
the pulse repetition frequency, and thus increase the Nykvist limit as the fN = ½ * PRF. On the other hand it will
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
56 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
be impossible to determine which pulse is the origin of the echo, and thus it will result in a partial depth
ambiguity.
The principle of HPRF. Pulses are transmitted with three times the
frequency that is necessary to allow the echo from the furthest
depth to return. Thus, the echo of pulse 1 will return from level 3 at
the same time as the echo of pulse 2 from level 2 and and of pulse 3
from level 1, and there is no way to determine whether a signal is
from level 1, 2 or 3.
HPRF pulsed Doppler recording (right). with one sample volume
in mid ventricle and one in the mitral ostium. The recording
shows a systolic dynamic gradient (due to inotropic stimulation
with dobutamine), as well as an ordinary mitral inflow curve.
There is no way in the pulsed recording to determine which
velocities that originate from which sample volume (except
from á priori knowledge, of course, a dynamic gradient like this
is usually mid ventricular, and the mitral inflow in the annulus is
easily recognised).
Colour Doppler mode (CFM)
The colour Dppler mode is based on analysing the phase shift of the reflected pulse, which is equivalent to the
Doppler shift. Shooting at least two (or more) pulses in rapid sequence, (NOT to be confused by sampling one
pulse at two timepoints as illustrated above) results in the possibility to analyse the Doppler shift in terms of
the phase shift between the pulses. The phase shift analysis is based on the principle that when pulse 2 hits a
moving scatterer, the scatterer will have moved a little away from, or towards the probe, and the return pulse 2
will then be in a different phase from pulse 1. The distance the scatterer has moved, is of course a function of
the velocity of the scatterer and the time between pulses given by the pulse repetition frequency, thus:
d = v * t = v * 1/PRF.
In order to avoid aliasing, the distance the scatterer moves should be less than half a wavelength, i.e. the
Nykvist limit. This is thus given by the pulse repetition frequency, exactly as in pulsed Doppler. In this case, the
PRF is 1/t, the time delay between the two pulses in one package. In order to obtain an acceptable Nykvist
limit, the PRF need to be at least 1 KHz which will result in a Nykvist limit of 19.8 at a depth of 15 cm.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
57 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Two pulses sent toward a scatterer with a time delay
t2 - t1 = 1/PRF. Given that the scatterer has a
velocity, it will have moved a distance, d, that is a
function of the velocity and the time (d = v x t). Thus,
pulse 2 travels a longer (or shorter) distance equal to
d with the speed of sound, c, before it is reflected.
During the time pulse2 has travelled the distance
d to the new position of the scatterer and back to
the point of the reflection of pulse 1, i.e. a
distance 2d pulse 1 has travelled the same
distance away from the reflection point. (The
scatterer will have travelled further, but this is
not relevant). Thus the diasplacement of the
waveform of pulse 2 relative to pulse 1, is 2d.
By sampling the two pulses simult
two timepoints, as shown in the p
illustration, the phase of each pul
determined. The phase analysis o
positions of all four points is done
autocorrelation, a quick (and dirt
that allows online computation.
The phase analusis is done by treating the waveform as a sine curve, where the phase of a point is represented
as an angle. This is described in more detail in the mathemathics section.
The two pulses represent a pulse package. The time between the two pulses represent 1/PRF; determining the
Nykvist limit. The time between two packages is 1/FR. The time between packages can be used for sampling
B-mode data for a B-mode image in a composite image.
The method will give the velocity at a certain depth, depending on the range gating as in pulsed Doppler. By
gating multiple sampling times from the same pulse package in post processing, the Doppler shift can be
measured at multiple depths along the line. As opposed to HPRF, only one pulse package can be sent out along
one line in order to await the return signal down to maximum depth (range), in order to avoid range ambiguity.
This means that the method is more similar to B-mode than HPRF, and the velocity ambiguity is similar to
pulsed Doppler. In fact, colour Doppler can be seen as a B-mode, where the phase (or frequency) shift is
analysed instead of the amplitude, stored as numerical values in each pixel (as amplitude is in B-mode), but
displayed as colour instead of brightness.
This again means that in order to build a sector, the next package has to be sent along next line, and a new
package can only be sent out along the first line when a complete set of scan lines has been built up. Thus the
time between packages in one line, and hence, the temporal resolution, is dependent on the frame rate, just as in
B-mode as described above. The temporal resolution can be increased by reducing sector depth, sector width
and line density. In addition, sampling at longer gating intervals, due to one package being two pulses, reduces
radial (depth) resolution. However, as the region of flow is only the cavity, and the region of interest usually
being only part of this, reducing sector size in order to obtain an acceptable frame rate is a feasible solution as
shown below.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
58 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Principle of package acquisition. Time depth diagram of the position
of a moving scatterer. Each dot represent one pulse. Packages of two
pulses are sent to the scatterer with intervals. The time between the
pulses in one package is given by 1/PRF, and decides the Nykvist
limit. The time between packages is the time it takes to build a full
sector of lines in colour flow mode (CFM) and is given by the frame
rate (FR), the time interval being 1/FR. This decides the temporal
resolution of the CFM.
CFM sector superposed on a B-mode sector. By reducing sector size
line density and sampling frequency, the CFM image can achieve an
acceptable frame rate. This is feasible because the region of interes
for the flow is usually only a part of the ROI for The B-mode, ,flow
being intracavitary as shown below.
In principle, two pulses are sufficient for phase analysis with perfect signals. However, more than two pulses
can be used in order to make the analysis more robust, in the autocorrelation method. This results in better
accuracy (reliability) of the velocity estimate. This, however increases the duration of each package (as the time
between two pulses is 1/PRF, a package of N pulses will have a duration of N-1/PRF), and thus it will affect
frame rate.
A theoretical frame rate of 1 KHz will make the use of packets unnecessary (as then PRF = FR, and phase
analysis can be done from one puls to the next, with the same Nykvist frequency). This is technically feasible
(272), and has been implemented in a novel application; Ultra high frame rate tissue Doppler (UFR-TDI) (215
,268).
Also, the possibility to display the full velocity information in each pixel is limited. In order to display multiple
velocities in real time over a sector, the numerical values are usually displayed only semi quantitatively as color.
Power Doppler shows the amplitude of the Doppler shifted signal, i.e. the blood flow.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
59 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Power Doppler image of the renal circulation. The amplitude is a function of
the number of scatterers, i.e. the number of blood cells with a Doppler shift.
This is shown as the brightness (hue) of the signal. In addition, direction of
flow can be imaged by different colours (red - positive flow - towards probe,
blue - negative colours - away from probe), and still the brightness may
show the amplitude.
Colour flow showing a large mitral regurgitation. Velocities aw
from the probe is shown in blue (converting to red where ther
aliasing), towards the probe is red. In this image, the green co
is used to show the spread (variance) of velocities. This will al
reflect areas of high velocities (high variance due to aliasing).
sector with colour flow is seen to be far smaller than the B-mo
sector. The image displays the direction, extent and timing of
jet.
2D colour flow gives mainly information on the direction of velocities, as well as colour M-mode giving the
direction - timing information. However, the information is numerical, and can be extracted as is done in colour
tissue Doppler, but this gives far less accurate values than pulsed and cw Doppler, as well as a reduced frame
rate.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
60 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Recording from a patient with apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Ejection can be seen in blue, and there is a delayed, separate ejection
from the apex due to delayed relaxation. There is an ordinary mitral inflow (red), but no filling of the apex in the early phase (E-wave), whi
the late phase (A-wave) can be seen to fill the apex. Left, a combined image in HPRF and colour M-mode. The PRF is adjusted to place
two samples at thr mitral annulus and in the mid ventricle just at the outlet of the apex. The mitral filling is shown by the green arrows, an
the late filling of the apex is marked by the blue arrow. In addition, theere is a dynamic mid ventricular gradient shown by the red arrow, w
aliasing in the ejection signal in colur Doppler. The delayed ejection from the apex is marked by the yellow arrow (the case is described in
(87). The utility of the different methods is evident: HPRF (or cw Doppler) for timing and velocity measurement, but with depth ambiguity,
colour M-mode for timing and location of the different jets, direction being displayed by the colour.
The phase analysis is often done by the process known as autocorrelation. This will result in a values that does
not reflect the spectrum, but only mean values in the spectrum. But if there is clutter in the region (stationary
echoes), this will be incorporated in the mean, resulting ion lower values. In Doppler flow, this can be filered by
the high pass filter, and thus will represent a small problem. In tissue Doppler, this may be a more significant
problem, as the velocities are only about 1/10 of the flow values, and thus clutter may be more difficult to
separate from true velocities. Thus, a substantial amunt of clutter may reduce autocorrelation values for tissue
Doppler more than pulsed Doppler as discussed below. In addition, it is customary to analyse the tissue Doppler
values in native, rather than harmonic imaging, due to the Nykvist limitation. Thus, there is a greater amount of
clutter than if harmonic imaging had been used, as shown in B-mode images.
For optimal colour flow, it is important to realise that there may, in some scanners, be an inverse relation
between the gain of colour Doppler and B-mode. (In some scanners it is possible to adjust the priority, or to
adjust the gain settings separately). This, however, is an acquisition finction, and not image adjustment, and thus
cannot be compensated afterwards. This is illustrated below:
Effect on B-mode gain on colour Doppler imaging. Left pulmonary venous flow by pwDoppler, showing a systolic flow component,
although low velocities. Middle, colour M-mode of the same patient. Only the diastolic flow component can be seen. Right,
reducing B-mode gain increases the gain of colour flow, and the systolic pulmonary venous flow can be seen.
Tissue Doppler.
The Doppler principle can be used both for blood flow and Tissue velocities. Tissue Doppler was first decribed
in 1989 (53). It is simply a question of different filtering of the Doppler signals. The main principle is that blood
has high velocity (Typically above 50 cm/s, although also all velocities down to zero), but low density, resulting
in low intensity (amplitude) reflected signals. Tissue has high density, resulting in high intensity signals, but low
velocity (typically below 20 cm/s). The difference in the applications used for the two sets of signals is mainly
differences in filtering, applying a high pass filter in Doppler flow, and low pass filter in tissue Doppler
(Although the latter is not absolutely necessary).
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
61 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
The diagram to the left shows the placement of flow and tissue signals on this intensity (amplitude) / velocity diagram. Velocity given as the height o
the placement on the x axis, as well as the darkness of the bars, black being the highest intensity. The flow signals are low intensity but mostly high v
low velocity, high intensity. The heart valves, however, are solid structures which moves with the velocity of the passing blood, resulting in high int
Doppler spectrum. A typical flow curve from the right ventricular outflow tract is shown to the left, with the valve click.
Application of a high pass filter (low velocity reject) shown schematically to the left and in practice applied to a mitral flow curve to the right. Velo
bar (showing the range of the filter) are removed seen in the dark zone in the middle of the spectrum. The setting rejects velocities at blood intensiti
high for normal flow velocities as in this instance, although may often be useful in continuous wave Doppler recordings of high velocities in jets.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
62 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
The filter is adjustable and is here reduced to 10 cm/s
Further reduction in the filter below 10 cm/s results in high intensity signals becoming visible, especially in early diastole. This is tissue signals fro
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
63 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Fully removing the filter results in a dense band of high intensity tissue signals around the baseline. The signal is difficult to analyse, as it has so hig
saturated.
Decreasing the scale and gain (shown as all signals being illustrated in lighter colour, but with the same relative placement on the x axis), and placi
ring, discloses the tissue velocity curve of the ring, still taken with an ordinary Doppler. The flow signal, having a much lower amplitude, is remove
All modern ultrasound machines today has separate applications for tissue Doppler which optimises the signal for this purpose, among other things
removes most of the flow velocities. This results in a cleaner signal.
Colour Tissue Doppler
The basic principles of colour tissue Doppler are the same as for colour flow mode (222). The difference is the
same as in spectral Doppler flow versus colur Doppler flow, except for the differences in filtering as shown
above. colour However, the region of interest is the same as in B-mode, being the myocardium. Thus the
solution of a small sector within the B-mode sector is unfeasible. However, as velocities are measured only
along the ultrasound beams, and cavity signals are filtered by low gain / low pass filter, the line density need not
be high. In addition, as the data are for numerical analysis, not imaging, artifacts from MLA are unimportant.
Thus, high frame rate in a full B-mode sector is achieved with a very low line density, and a higher MLA
(typically 4). Thus the B-mode and colour Doppler images are displayed superposed, but the acquisition is
interleaved, recording a multiple of colour Doppler images between each B-mode frame. (For instance 16 lines
acquired by 4 MLA in colour Doppler interleaved with one B-mode image acquired with 64 lines at 2MLA for
every fourth Doppler image will result in a Doppler frame rate of 160 for a B-mode frame rate of 40).
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
64 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Both velocity and strain rate information can be displayed on the B-mode image, just as in colour flow.
However, as seen below, in this case it does not display location of jets, as most motion and deformation is fairly
more uniform. In addition, shifts are too quick to visualise entirely.
Thus, in colour tissue Doppler, the main function is to get data for post processing, either for semi quantitative
analysis in curved anatomical M-mode as shown below, or to extract quantitative data as velocity or
deformation curves. The advantage over pulsed Doppler, is the near simultaneity of the data over the sector,
being important in comparing regional motion from different segments of the wall. In colour flow, simultaneity
is less important, and so quantitative information is rather acquired by pulsed or cw Doppler, giving far higher
temporal resolution.
Curved anatomical M-mode
This method, developed by Lars Åke Brodin and Bjørn Olstad shows the whole time sequence in one wall at a
time. (18). By this method, a line is drawn in the wall, and tissue velocity data are sampled for the whole time
interval (e.g. one heart cycle) and displayed in colour along a line in a time plot, as shown below. This has the
advantage of displaying the whole sequence in a still picture, giving a temporal resolution like the frame rate of
the 2D tissue Doppler.
Velocity and strain rate imaging of the same (normal) left ventricle. The
colour sector can bee seen to be equal to the B-mode sector.Velocity is red
in systole when all parts of the heart muscle moves toward the probe (apex)
and blue in diastole. The changes are too quick to observe entirely, to make
full use of the information the image has to be stopped and scrolled.
Curved anatomical M-mode (CAMM). A line is drawn from ap
over time are sampled along the line and displayed in colour al
on the curve and the M-mode are included for reference and c
the B-mode image. This example shows the septum from the a
one heart cycle along the other, in a two - dimensional space -
relaxation, A: atrail contraction.
Velocity traces
The information coded in the colour images, is fundamentally numerical for all varieties of colour doppler, as
described above. Thus, the velocity time traces can be extracted fom any point in the image as shown below.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
65 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Extracted velocity curves from three points in the septum. As in colour flow, the M-mode gives the depth - time - direction
information, while the curves give the quantitative information.
Thus: 2D images show the whole sector image at one point in time, velocity or strain (rate) traces shows the
whole time sequence (f.i. a heart cycle) at one point in space, while CAMM shows the time sequence as well as
the length of the line, but only semi quantitative motion / deformation information.
Measurement of peak values in relation to the Doppler spectrum
The width of the spectrum in Doppler flow is mainly determined by the dispersion of velocities. However, the
main use of pulsed wave tissue Doppler is for measuring annulus velocities, and the annulus is stiff, with
propapility of dispersion of velocities. Also, in pulsed tissue Doppler, the insonation angle is small. Despite this,
the spectrum has a certain width, indicating a spectrum of velocities:
Spectrum width in tissue Doppler. Image courtesy of H Dalen.
Thus, the main determinant of the width of the spectrum is determined by the bandwidth. Ideally, the most
representative value of the spectrum is the modal velocity (the velocity in the middle of the spectrum), not the
maximal value (at the top of the spectrum). This will also be the values that are most similar to the tissue
Doppler values obtained by autocorrelation (colour tissue Doppler). We tested this in a preliminary study (266),
using spectral Doppler reconstructed from IQ data.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
66 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Spectral Doppler reconstructed from IQ data. Candidates for measuring peak systolic velocity by the PW tissue Doppler
spectrum. RED circle: peak of the spectrum at normal gain, GREEN circle: upper edge of
the strongest part (the part visualised at minimal gain), BLUE circle: middle of the strongest part. MAGENTA circle and line:
autocorrelation. As seen, imn this example the autocorrelation corresponds to the middle of the spectrum. (Figure courtesy of
Svein Arne Aase, modified from (266))
For a reference mehod, Peak slope of systolic M-mode in the same time point was chosen:
Reference method. A: pw Doppler from the mitral ring (reconstructed from RF data). Peak velocity of the ring displacement can
be identified. B: This corresponds to the maximal slope of the M-mode line at the same time point. C: The M-mode in the same
time window from the RF data. This gives a far better resolution in space and slope. D: In the RF M-mode the steepest sloe was
identified automatically. This will be a reference for the maximal velocity. (Figure courtesy of Svein Arne Aase, modified from
(266))
In this study of 9 healthy volunteers, we found that the middle of the spectrum was the cloasest value (although
statstically significant under estimation, but that peak value of the strongest part would be close enough (266),
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
67 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
with just a slightly higher over estimation.
As this figure shows, the peak spectrum results in a substatial over estimation. reducing the gain improves the over estimation,
while the modal velocity is closest to the reference. Autocorrelation on the other hand results in significant under estimation, due
to the presence of clutter. Only four subjects showed almost totall correspondence between autocorrelation and modasl velocity
from spectral doppler. (Figure courtesy of Svein Arne Aase, modified from (266))
In perfect image quality, modal velocity should be equal to autocorrelation, but in the case there is clutter,
autocorrelation would not give similar values, as clutter would be incorporated into the mean. In the study
above, this was the case with most subjectys, resulting in a significant difference between modal velocity from
spectral Doppler and autocorrelation. This is firthewr discussed below.
Thus, most of the differences reported between pw Tissue Doppler (145, 165) and colour tissue Doppler are due
to the width of the spectrum. But if so, this would give a good correlation between methods, and a more or less
constant offset (165, 267).
Left: spectral tissue Doppler, illustrating the width of the spectrum. The modal (average) velocity curve is indicated in black.
Right, colour tissue
Doppler from the same location in the same patient, obtained by autocorrelation, giving average values directly. Peak values
correspond fairly.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
68 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
In addition, the width of the spectrum is dependent on the gain setting. Increased gain setting increases the peak
values (145) as illustrated below:
Same tissue Doppler recording with two different gain settings. We see that peak systolic velocity differs by 2 cm/s, and the
lowest gain setting
is closest to the modal velocity. However, the modal velocity itself, remains unchanged by the gain setting.
It is evident that the modal velocity is closest tio the "true" velocity, if peak values are used, they should be
obtained and analysed by the lowest readable gain setting.
On the other hand, filtering of the colour tissue Doppler reduces peak values, and will also increase the
difference between the methods (145). Autocorrelation with high filtering or low frame rate will thus
underestimate the true mean value.
Reverberations in tissue Doppler
However: Modal velocity may be influenced by stationary reverberations. The mechanism for the formation of
reverberations are explained above.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
69 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Image from another subject in the study shown above (266). In this subjech there is
some clutter from reverberations, as seen by the band in systole close to the zero
line. In this case the peak velocity by autocorrelation is lower than the modal
velocity of the main spectral band, which still was the one closest to the RF M-mode
reference. (Figure courtesy of Svein Arne Aase, modified from (266))
Clutter filtering may reduce the problem, as seen her
clutter close to zero velocities, but as seen here, the s
very easy to separate the true and clutter velocities.
affects the autocorrelation velocity (red line), giving
clutter filter this effect is removed (red line) , and the
higher. Image modified from (268).
Reverberations are stationary echoes, meaning that the echoes will incorporate zero velocities (clutter). Most of
the reverberation echoes are in the fundamental imaging frequency. However, harmonic imaging halves the
frequency, and thus the Nykvist limit. This means that there will be aliasing at half the velocity in harmnonic
imaging, compared to fundamental. And this is within the range of tissue velocities. Thus harmonic imaging is
unfeasable in tissue Doppler, and the harmonic acquisition makes the method more vulnerable to reverberations
than B-mode, as explained below.
Reverberations in the septum of a normal ventricle. The colour bands are stationary In pulsed wave tissue Doppler, the clutter will
velocities, but the true velocity curves can be
line, and thus peak velocities can still be masu
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
70 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Spectral Tissue Dopplere is thus fairly robust against clutter, at it measures peak values. However, using modal
velocity, renders it more vulnerable.
Thus, spectral values will incorporate pixels with zero velocity, and the spectrum will broaden, with a reduction
in average velocity due to artifacts, as illustrated below.
A patient with a stationary reverberation in the basal lateral wall (left), with the sampling point for both pw and colour Doppler is
indicated. . The pw spectral Doppler (middle) can be seen to be broadened, comprising all velocities between peak and zero. This is
due to stationary pixels due to the artifact, but a sufficient number of pixels with normal velocity (and a number of pixels in
between). Averaging the spectrum will result in too low values, as the lowest values are due to artifact. The autocorrelation values
(right) are likewise average values, thus too low.
Colour Dopplere, however, calculating average velocities, will average in the clutter. Looking at the same
example as above, we see the difference in peak values:
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
71 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Velocity curves from the reverberations shown in the video above. Left colour Doppler from three sites showing peak systolic
values of about 3, 2 and 1 cm/s, respectively. The pulsed Doppler recordings from the same sites separates the clutter from the
velocity signal, and thus we find peak systolic velocities of about 12, 11 and 8 cm/s, respectively. Normally the systematic
difference between the two methods is only about 1.5 - 2 cm/s as shown in the HUNT study.
From this, it would seem that clutter is solely non random noise, but in fact they also increases random noise,
and thus has an impact on strain rate calculations as explained in the measurements section.
Thus, maximum values are more robust in relation to artifacts than both taking the middle of the spectrum and
colour tissue Doppler. For the present, the best compromise seems to be:
pw Tissue Doppler should be measured as maximal values, but with the lowest possible gain setting.
Ultra high frame rate tissue Doppler (UFR-TDI)
By reducing the number of sender beams and increasing the MLA factor, it has proved possible to increase the
TDI frame rate substatially (172, 268). Using two broad, unfocussed (planar) beams, each covering one wall, as
well as 16 MLA and sparse interleaved B-mode imaging, it has been possible to increase frame rate to 1200 FPS
in 2D imaging. this is the extreme example of exchanging spatial for temporal resolution.
Few beams give high frame rate. Image courtesy of Svein Arne Aase, modified from(172).
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
72 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Already this has shown new information about both the pre ejection and post ejection dynamics.
Strain rate imaging by tissue Doppler
The simultaneous measurement of velocities in the whole sector, enables the measurement of velocity
differences. This is the prerequisite for measuring the velocity gradient or strain rate by tissue Doppler.
Thus, longitudinal velocity gradient, is a measure of longitudinal strain rate. However, it can be shown that this
is equal to the velocity gradient over a fixed distance. Strain rate by tissue Doppler measures the velocity
gradient of two points over a segment with a fixed distance (In the latest scanner software, the velocity gradient
is in fact calculated by linear regression of all pixel velocities within the delta x, to reduce noise.):
This is a different algorithm from the velocity gradient, but it can be proved (here) that the two formulas result
in the same ratio. The distance is called the offset distance or strain length.
a b
a, longitudinal velocity gradient, where v1 and v2 are two different velocities measured at points 1 and 2, and L the instantaneous
length of the segment between those points. The velocity gradient is given in the formula. b, strain rate measured by tissue
Doppler, as the velocities of a segment with fixed length as shown by the formula. It can be proven that these two approaches
yield the same result.
Thus:
Strain rate by linear regression
Instead of measuring just the velocities at the ends of the offset distance; or
respectively, the velocity gradient / strain rate can be calculated as the slope of the regression line of all
velocities along the offset distance as described originally (14). With perfect data, the values will be identical,
both formulas defining the slope. With imperfect data, this method will tend to make the method less sensitive
to errors in velocity measurements, as the value is an average of more measurements.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
73 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Strain rate calculated over an offset (strain length) of 12 mm (L). "True" strain rate at the end points are v1 = 0 and v2 = 1.2 cm s-1
giving a strain rate of -1.0 s-1
(blue squares), the strain rate is actually the slope of the line between the points, being equal to (v2 -
v1)/L. Due to random variability of the measurements, the measured values deviate from the slope. Here velocities are sampled for each
0.5 mm along the strain length (red points), and are seen to be dispersed around the true strain rate line. The regression line through the
points (red line) is fairly close to the true strain line, and results in a strain rate measurement of -1.14 s-1
. This makes the measurement
far less vulnerable to measurement variability than simply measuring the two velocities at the end of the strain length (points in the green
open squares), and compute SR = (v2 - v1)/L shown by the green line, yielding a strain rate of -1.63 s-1
.
Strain by speckle tracking
Motion of one kernel can thus be measured throughout one heart cycle. Velocity can be derived from the
motion curve or calculated by the motion divided by the frame interval. With two kernels, the relative
displacement per distance can be derived. This is equal to strain. Likewise the relative velocity per distance
(velocity gradient / strain rate) can be calculated or derived from the strain curve.
Strain by speckle tracking has been validated by ultrasonomicrometry in the longitudinal direction (124) as well
as for rotation (125).
One way of using this approach, is to place defined ROI in the myocardium at the segmental borders and
measure segmental strain and strain rate directly by changes in segment length. This is true segmental strain
rate, and angle independent measures, eliminating the insonation angle problems discussed elsewhere..
Kernel displacement Displacement curve obtained by tracking
through a whole heart cycle shown to the right, derived velocity
curve shown below.
From two different kernels, the relative displacement and hence,
strain as well as strain rate can be derived.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
74 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
With kernels at all segmental borders, segmental motion and
deformation can be tracked, as shown to the right.
And the length variations of the segments between the kernels
kan be followed through the heart cycle.
From strain, the strain rate can be derived by temporal derivation.
The advantage of this method is that it tracks in two dimensions, along the direction of the wall, not along the
ultrasound beam, and thus is angle independent. This means true longitudinal strain. The disadvantage is that if
the algorithm does not track one kernel correctly, the strain values will be wrong for the segments on both sides
of the kernel. This is evident in areas of drop outs or reverberations as shown here. This can be overcome by
increasing the number of kernels, or manually avoiding placing a kernel in an area of drop out or reverberation.
It is important to be aware that strain measured by speckle tracking is Lagrangian strain directly. Derivation
yields Lagrangian strain rate, while tissue Doppler yields Eulerian strain rate. Commercially, it has been
customary to display the Eulerian or natural strain rate (velocity gradient) derived directly from tissue velocity
data, but to apply a correction when integrating to strain rate and display Lagrangian strain. For Strain rate from
speckle tracking, a reverse correction has to be applied, either calculating velocity from displacement and then
strain rate from velocity, or calculate strain rate from strain and then apply a conversion. Thus, if Lagrangian
strain is derived directly from the segment length change, the Eulerian strain rate can be derived by the simple
conversion:
This, however, is not as simple as it looks. As can be seen from the equation, the formula converts the strain
rate at a specific time from Lagrangian to Eulerian strain rate, but as shown above, the peak strain rate is not
simultaneous by the two calculations. Thus, peak Lagrangian strain rate (which is lower than Eulerian), will be
converted to Eulerian strain at the time of peak Lagrangian strain, not the peak Eulerian strain itself, so the
conversion is practically useless. This is in contrast to the conversion between strains, as bot Eulerian and
Lagrangian strain are cumulated maximal strain, which is at end systole and simultaneous.
Speckle tracking can also be combined with tissue Doppler in various combinations for more efficient tracking
as described below.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
75 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Strain rate is displayeed as yellow to orange in systole (shortening) and
cyan to blue in the two diastolic phases early and late filling (lengthening),
but green in periods of no deformation. The changes are too quick to
observe entirely, to make full use of the information the image has to be
stopped and scrolled.
Combined strain rate image with one systolic and one diastolic
frame displaued in B.mode, below the CAMM from the septum
and below that the strain rate (yellow) and strain curves from
one point in septum.
Relation between velocity, displacement, strain and strain rate
As seen below, velocity information may be extracted from the colour image, and strain rate may be derived,
displacement integrated and strain may be derived/integrated from velocity data. How this gives different
relations between curves is explained in detail in the main section.
Derived measurements
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
76 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Integration
of
velocity
Velocity traces may be considered the raw data. All other modalities are integrated
or derived from this. Here normal function is shown at normal basal velocity (6
cm/s), as well as normal decrease from base to apex. This decrease is evident by
visual assessment alone, as the distance between the curves. The distance between
the curves then is a direct visual assessment of strain rate. Strain rate curves can be
obtained by spatial derivation of velocity:
Displacement curves obtained by integration of ve
reduces velocity to motion. In principle, strain co
derivation of displacement, although not used:
Integration
of strain
rate
The strain rate curves are the spatial derivative of velocity, showing the time course
of the velocity gradient. This is equivalent to the local deformation rate. The curves,
however, are noisy, shown in this unfiltered image, the increase in random noise is a
consequence of derivation.
Strain is regional deformation. This can be obtain
strain (not used at present) and temporal integratio
Harmonic tissue Doppler
Harmonic imaging in tissue Doppler leads to aliasing, as seen by this colour M-mode. However, Strain rate
imaging, using the velocity differences, will neutralise this, as usually both velocities in the equation (V1 - V2)/L
are aliased, and thus the difference remains the same. So in strain rate imaging, aliasing is effectively
unwrapped, as shown previously (167).
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
77 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
Colour M-mode (CAMM) of tissue velocities in fundamental (above) and
harmonic (below) imaging. Slight aliasing can be seen in native
imaging in the e' wave at the base. In harmonic imaging, there is aliasing both
in the S' wave, and the e' wave (double).
Colour tissue Doppler curved M-mode in harmonic
imaging, velocity plot (above), strain rate (below). As can
be seen there is heavy aliasing in the
velocity plot, but no aliasing in strain rate imaging.
However, this would imply that separate recordings had to be taken for strain rate and velocity analysis, instead
of post processing strain rate from TDI recordings, but might improve the reverberation sensitivity of strain rate
imaging by tissue Doppler.
Tracking by combined speckle tracking and tissue Doppler
Tracking tissue motion by speckle tracking is described above. Modern ultrasound equipment has the capability
of acquiring second harmonic greyscale images with an acceptable frame rate of 40 - 50 FPS and good lateral
resolution simultaneously with tissue Doppler data. This opens the possibility of tracking along the ultrasound
beam by tissue Doppler, simply by calculating the displacement from one frame to next from the velocity and
frame interval, while tracking transverse to the ultrasound beam can be done by speckle tracking (124).
Image showing the speckle tracking from both modalities. The kernels are shown as the small, round, yellow circles. The longitudinal
search area along the ultrasound beam by tissue Doppler is shown in red. The lateral search area by speckle tracking is shown in white.
This has several advantages:
It increases computational speed, as the SAD is calculated over a far smaller area, especially as the
1.
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
78 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
longitudinal motion is greater than the transverse.
If the method is used to compute longitudinal velocities or strain rate, the longitudinal tracking is done
with the high sampling frequency of tissue Doppler, thus reducing the possibility of undersampling.
2.
It utilises the full dataset inherent in the combined image. It is not reasonable to assume that discarding
part of the information in the acquisition results in better data.
3.
Using tissue Doppler in this way, eliminates the angle dependency.
4.
This method can be used in different ways to analyse strain rate imaging (127) as described here and has even
been shown to be clinically useful in stress echo (128).
Back to section index
Back to website index
Editor: Asbjorn Støylen, Contact address: asbjorn.stoylen@ntnu.no
Basic ultrasound, echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound http://folk.ntnu.no/stoylen/strainrate/Ultrasound/
79 sur 79 11/12/2014 12:04
