Journal of Diagnostic Medical Sonography
2014, Vol. 30(4) 200­
–204
© The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/8756479314534523
jdms.sagepub.com
Original Article
Technologic advances over the years have had a signifi-
cant impact on sonography, for both image-processing
systems and ultrasound probes.1,2
Probe technology in
particular has seen evolvement from static single-crystal
systems to mechanical sector scanners to linear arrays
and real-time 3D systems. A recent addition to this tech-
nology is an ultrasound probe compatible with a smart-
phone.3,4
This article discusses this emerging technology
considering the physics, development, function, and the
potential applications of a smartphone system, along with
the limitations and disadvantages of such a system.
The Smartphone Probe
InApril 2009, two investigators at Washington University
in St Louis announced the development of a smartphone-
compatible ultrasound probe (Figure 1).5
The work repre-
sented the culmination of two and a half decades of
research and development, reducing the size of the sys-
tem from a full electronic cabinet to a small 1 × 3–inch
circuit board (Figure 2). The size of the device allows
physicians and sonographers to use a mobile device small
enough to fit easily in the hand (Figure 3a,b and Figure 4).
The present system is only compatible with Windows
(Microsoft, Redmond, Washington)–based smartphones.
The technologic challenges that had to be overcome were
primarily the trade-offs associated with battery power
consumption and the speed of data transfer. A secondary
challenge was creation of the necessary algorithms that
allowed the display of the image on the smartphone
screen. A device was approved for use by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) in 2011 after meeting strict
regulatory requirements for medical “apps.”6,7
Today a
variety of specialized probes have been developed cover-
ing a frequency range of 2 to 18 MHz. These probes can
be plugged into a USB port not only on smartphones but
534523JDMXXX10.1177/8756479314534523Journal of Diagnostic Medical Sonography X(X)Jones
research-article2014
Corresponding Author:
Delores Jones, RDMS, RT(S), BDMS, PO Box 262, Monroe, NC
28111, USA.
Email: delolo1979@yahoo.com
Smartphone-Compatible Ultrasound
Probe
Delores Jones, RDMS, RT(S), BDMS
Abstract
Smartphones are one of the most widely used cell phones in the United States today. They perform multiple functions,
and in April 2009, another capability was added to that list. Smartphones are now able to display sonographic images
of the human body and organs through use of a smartphone-compatible ultrasound probe. The probe can be plugged
into the USB slot of a smartphone and used to allow gray-scale image visualization. This article discusses the function
and structure of this new and emerging technology while looking at the impact of this technology on the field of
sonography.
Keywords
emerging technology, smartphone, ultrasound probe, point of care
Figure 1.  Photograph of a smartphone probe connected
to the USB port of a Windows operating system–based
mobile phone. From http://billkosloskymd.typepad.com/
wirelessdoc/2009/05/ultrasound-imaging-with-smartphones-
using-a-usbbased-probe.html
at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 18, 2015
jdm.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Jones	 201
also tablets, laptops, and desktop computers. The probes
can be used for typical applications in imaging such
structures as the liver, kidney, bladder, and endocavitary
applications, with special-purpose probes designed for
applications such as very high-frequency imaging, ultra-
sound guidance for biopsies, vascular access, and central
line placement (Figures 5 and 6).
Clinical Applications
The primary use for a handheld smartphone-based ultra-
sound system is the wide variety of point-of-care (POC)
applications: office or bedside examinations in primary
care, emergency care, critical care, obstetrics, and ultra-
sound-guided procedures. It has not been the intent of
the developers of these systems to provide comprehen-
sive diagnostic sonographic studies but to quickly answer
a specific clinical question. For example, in the emer-
gency care setting, a FAST examination (focused assess-
ment with sonography for trauma, evaluating the
perihepatic space or Morison’s pouch, the perisplenic
space, the pericardium, and the pelvis) or the extended
FAST examination (eFAST, which includes an evalua-
tion for pneumothorax) can be carried out quickly with
such a handheld device with very good sensitivity and
specificity.8–10
An additional area of application for such devices
would be extremely remote areas such as rural regions of
developing countries or military battlefields where acces-
sibility, including access to electricity, may be a signifi-
cant issue. A battery-powered, rechargeable handheld
device would provide rapid sonographic imaging to many
more potential patients than could be done using conven-
tional high-end ultrasound systems.
A smartphone-based ultrasound system has the poten-
tial to become the stethoscope of the future if appropriate
training of medical students and residents not in formal
radiology programs can be implemented.11,12
A number of
medical schools—such as the University of South
Carolina; the University of California, Irvine; Harvard
Medical School; and the Icahn School of Medicine at Mt
Sinai—have introduced ultrasound training early in their
Figure 2.  Current size of the printed circuit board (approximately 1 × 3 inches, shown with a penny for comparison) used for
the smartphone probe. From www.medgadget.com/2009/04/mobile_clinical_imaging_on_a_smart_phone.html
at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 18, 2015
jdm.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
202	 Journal of Diagnostic Medical Sonography 30(4)
programs. Emergency medicine residency programs now
are required to include basic training in abdominal, car-
diac, and obstetric ultrasound as well as ultrasound guid-
ance of procedures. Studies have shown the enhanced
diagnostic capabilities of medical students when they use
a POC ultrasound device compared with the physical
examination.11,13
Despite these advancements it is likely
to take a full generation for the medical community as a
whole to incorporate this technology throughout physi-
cian training and practice.
There are advantages as well as limitations associ-
ated with this emerging technology. The advantages of
its compact size and thus its inherent mobility allow
sonographic studies to be performed in virtually any set-
ting no matter how remote or cramped for space. By
linking the probe to a smartphone device, it takes advan-
tage of the ubiquitous nature of such devices. There are
other compact handheld ultrasound systems available,
but these are not physically linked to a smartphone.
Systems such as the VScan (GE Healthcare Ultrasound,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin), the Acuson P10 (Siemens
Healthcare Ultrasound, Malvern, Pennsylvania), or the
Signos (Signostics, Adelaide, Australia) have the probe
hard-wired to a dedicated image viewing system and at
present do not offer plug-in capabilities. Using a USB
port to connect the probe to the smartphone allows some
degree of future flexibility for probe selection and the
potential for expanding the areas of application to all
systems of the body. (Of note, however, the manufac-
turer of the current FDA-approved device [MobiSante,
Redmond, WA] sells the probe, with two different fre-
quency ranges available [3.5–5 MHz and 7.5–12 MHz],
and a specific smartphone with USB capabilities as a
coupled unit, so the potential for fully expanded appli-
cations remains in the future.) When smartphone manu-
facturers in the United States fully implement USB
features on their devices, this will open up a vast net-
work of possible users and will be a factor in driving
the price down. The present system is able to take
Figure 3.  (a, b) Gray-scale sonographic images displayed on
a smartphone. From (a) http://gpsmedical.typepad.com/gps_
medical/page/2/ and (b) https://www.engineeringforchange.org/
news/2011/06/02/ultrasound_is_now_on_smart_phones.html
Figure 4.  Smartphone probe being used to evaluate the
carotid artery. From http://www.gizmag.com/ultrasound-
images-a-snap-with-a-smartphone/11556/
at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 18, 2015
jdm.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
Jones	 203
advantage of smartphones’ cellular and Wi-Fi capabili-
ties to transmit stored images to other sites and/or a pic-
ture archiving and communication system, creating the
possibility of not only imaging in remote regions but
remote interpretation as well.
There are drawbacks and limitations to this new tech-
nology. The cost of a system is in the range of $5000 to
$10,000, which is too high to be able to place them in all
the areas of need. Most smartphones in the United States
are not set up with USB 2.0 support, which significantly
limits widespread applicability of the technology. As with
all of sonography, the results of an examination depend
not only on the technology but also on the skill level of
the operator. A great deal of research and work remains to
be done to determine the necessary amount of education
and training required to make the technology useful at the
level of the stethoscope.14
A significant potential draw-
back to the technology is once most smartphones have the
capability to add an ultrasound probe at a low cost, the
technology will be available to a wide lay audience with
no training whatsoever. It does not take much imagina-
tion to see that abuse of this development would drive the
public image of ultrasound from one of diagnostic medi-
cine to a means of producing unique entertainment
images and video.
Overall, the possible impact of this technology is sig-
nificant. Mobile, POC sonography is likely to change
the way medicine is practiced in many areas and cer-
tainly will affect the role of the sonographer. The future
remains uncertain whether sonographers will be called
on more and more to do focused, rapid screening types
of examinations rather than full diagnostic examina-
tions. The advantage of using very small compact sys-
tems is the likelihood of decreasing the risk of developing
musculoskeletal problems related to poor ergonomics
and large high-end ultrasound systems. Will trained
sonographers become more of a teacher to groups need-
ing to develop the scanning skills needed for POC
sonography rather than acquiring the images them-
selves? Who ultimately will interpret the images
acquired? Ideally, and the potential strength of POC
sonography, is for interpretation to be done at the time
of image acquisition, but will POC users be adequately
trained for this role? These questions, the ethical
Figure 5.  A wide variety of probe types that plug into a USB port are currently available. (a) Abdominal probe, frequency range
3.5 to 5 MHz; (b) general-purpose probe, frequency range 3.5 to 5 MHz; (c) vascular probe, frequency range 8 to 24 MHz; (d)
endocavitary probe, frequency range 7.5 to 24 MHz. From http://www.interson.com/products/seemore-153-usb-probes
at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 18, 2015
jdm.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
204	 Journal of Diagnostic Medical Sonography 30(4)
questions of placing sonography in the hands of
untrained laypersons, and others remain to be answered.
It is certain that this technology and the trend to “minia-
turization” will continue; what is uncertain is how the
technology will be integrated into medicine and good
patient care.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
Funding
The author received no financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
References
	 1.	 Newman PG, Rozycki GS: The history of ultrasound. Surg
Clin North Am 1998;78(2):179–195.
	 2.	 O’Brien WD Jr: Assessing the risks for modern diagnostic
ultrasound imaging. Jpn J Appl Phys 1998;37:2781–2788.
	 3.	 Richard WD, Zar DM, Solek R: A low-cost B-mode USB
ultrasound probe. Ultrasonic Imaging 2008;30:21–28.
	4.	 Gravitz L: Ultrasound to go. MIT Tech Rev 2009;113(2):
36–37.
	5.	Fitzpatrick T: Ultrasound imaging now possible with a
smartphone. Washington University in St. Louis Newsroom
2009. http://news.wustl.edu/news/Pages/13928.aspx
	 6.	 DolanB:FDAapprovesMobisante’ssmartphoneultrasound.
2011. http://mobihealthnews.com/10165/fda-approves-
mobisantes-smartphone-ultrasound
	 7.	 Goodier R: Ultrasound in now on smartphones. Engineering
for Change 2011. https://www.engineeringforchange.org/
news/2011/06/02/ultrasound_is_now_on_smart_phones.html
	8.	Rozycki G, Shackford S: Ultrasound, what every trauma
surgeon should know. J Trauma 1996;40(1):1–4.
	 9.	 Sirlin CB, Brown MA, Andrade-Barreto OA, et al: Blunt
abdominal trauma: clinical value of negative screening US
scans. Radiology 2004;230(3):661–668.
	
10.	 Farahmand N, Sirlin CB, Brown MA, et al: Hypotensive
patients with blunt abdominal trauma: performance of
screening US. Radiology 2005;235(2):436–443.
	
11.	 Mouratev G, Howe D, Hoppmann R, et al: Teaching medi-
cal students ultrasound to measure liver size: comparison
with experienced clinicians using physical examination
alone. Teach Learn Med 2013;25:84–88.
	
12.	 Solomon SD, Saldana F: Point-of-care ultrasound in medi-
cal education—stop listening and look. N Engl J Med
2014;370(12):1083–1085.
	
13.	Kobal SL, Trento L, Baharami S, et al: Comparison
of effectiveness of hand-carried ultrasound to bedside
cardiovascular physical examination. Am J Cardiol
2005;96:1002–1006.
	
14.	 Liebo MJ, Israel RL, Lillie EO, Smith MR, Rubenson DS,
Topol EJ: Is pocket mobile echocardiography the next-
generation stethoscope? A cross-sectional comparison of
rapidly acquired images with standard transthoracic echo-
cardiography. Ann Intern Med 2011;155:33–38.
Figure 6.  (a) An ophthalmic ultrasound probe operating at
a 24-MHz frequency with a USB port interface. (b) An image
using that probe of the anterior compartment of the eye.
From http://www.ocuscience.us/id78.html
at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 18, 2015
jdm.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
