ULTRASOUND
MOTOR
PLASTIC CASE
SILICONE MEMBRANE
PLASTIC DOME
ULTRASOUND
TRANSDUCER
MATCHING
FLUID
OPTICAL SENSOR
TRANSDUCER AND
SENSOR HOLDER
Very Fast Scanning Probe for Ophthalmic
Echography Using an Ultrasound Motor
Riccardo Carotenuto
Dipartimento I.M.E.T.
Università degli Studi “Mediterranea” di Reggio Calabria
Loc. Feo di Vito, 89069 Reggio Calabria, Italy
r.carotenuto@ing.unirc.it
Giosuè Caliano, Alessandro Caronti,
Alessandro Savoia, Massimo Pappalardo
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettronica
Università degli Studi “Roma Tre”
Via della Vasca Navale 84, 00146 Roma, Italy
Abstract—High frequency transducers, up to 35-50 MHz, are
widely used in ophthalmic echography to image fine eye
structures. At such a high frequency, mechanical scanning probe
are the only practical alternative. A good probe
positioning-image evaluation feedback requires an image
refresh-rate of 15-30 frames per second. In this work, we present
the probe design and construction, the experimental
characterization and a first high frequency echographic image
obtained with a prototype probe based on an ultrasound motor.
The prototype probe reaches a scanning rate of 15 frames per
second, with very silent operation and little weight.
Keywords-ultrasound motor; high frequency probe; ophthalmic
echoraphy; mechanical scanning
I. INTRODUCTION
Ophthalmic diseases are frequent among persons over the
age of 65. For example, glaucoma represents the third most
frequently reported disease among all causes. Glaucoma is
mainly caused by the alteration of some fine eye structures that
control the intra ocular pressure. Fine eye structures can be
imaged for diagnosis purposes using high frequency
transducers, in the range 35-50 MHz, with high resolution and
low penetration depth. In this frequency range, the
element-to-element pitch of a phased array transducer becomes
so small as to make the transducer hard to be manufactured [1].
As a matter of fact, the element pitch should be less than half
wavelength for phased array, in order to prevent the grating
lobes from falling in the imaging field. At 35 MHz, the ideal
pitch is only 22 µm, making the element blade cutting of a
standard piezoelectric ceramic transducer very troublesome.
On the other hand, good single element transducers are
currently available, which are based on PVDF technology,
showing very good sensitivity, around 80-100% fractional
bandwidth with central frequency up to 50 MHz. Using single
element transducers, B-Mode imaging can be obtained by
means of mechanical scanning. Due to gear backlash and
mechanical rotational inertia, commercial mechanical probe
systems are limited to scanning rates up to 8-10 frames per
second. However, good quality imaging, and good image
evaluation and probe positioning feedback, requires an image
refresh-rate of 15-30 frames per second.
In a previous work [2], some of the authors described a
piezomotor in which the stator and the rotor are not directly
coupled, and the energy transfer from the stator to the rotor
takes place via a steel axle. The main characteristics of this
motor are: structural simplicity and relative high rotor speed
(≈ 3000 rpm) and torque (≈ 18 µN⋅m).
In this paper, we present a prototype of a mechanical
scanning probe based on the previously described piezomotor.
The prototype is mechanically characterized and a first high
frequency ophthalmic echographic image is shown.
II. THE MECHANICAL SCANNING PROBE
The scanning probe is composed of the above mentioned
piezoelectric motor, glued by means of silicone rubber drops
on a printed circuit board (PCB), and a high frequency PVDF
ultrasound transducer (Blatek, State College, PA, USA) (center
frequency 35 MHz, -6 dB bandwidth about 110%, diameter 7
mm, and 12.1 mm fixed focus). The ultrasound transducer is
mounted on an aluminum holder together with an angular
optical incremental sensor. The motor is excited with four
properly delayed 30 VPP square signals at 87.5 kHz.
Figure 1. The probe mechanical structure: the transducer is mounted together
the optical sensor mask on the motor rotor; the transducer is immersed in a
matching fluid sealed between a plastic dome and an elastic membrane that
protects the motor and the optical sensor.
In order to avoid acoustical impedance mismatch, the
transducer can work in two ways: immersed in a water bath, or
1310
0-7803-8412-1/04/$20.00 (c)2004 IEEE.
0-7803-8412-1/04/$20.00 (c)2004 IEEE.
2004 IEEE International Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics,
and Frequency Control Joint 50th Anniversary Conference
2004 IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium
PIEZOELECTRIC
MOTOR
ULTRASOUND
TRANSDUCER
OPTICAL
SENSOR
MICRO
CONTROLLER
PERSONAL
COMPUTER
PULSER/RECEIVER
FEEDBACK
CONTROL LOOP
IMAGE DISPLAY
fully immersed in silicone oil (Dow-Corning, USA) having an
acoustical impedance similar to that of water, and contained in
an acoustically transparent dome (see Fig. 1). The dome is
properly shaped as to be put in contact safely with the patient’s
eye through the usual matching water gel.
Figure 2. Probe prototype photo: external view of the probe with the dome.
The water of the bath, or the fluid inside the dome, are
separated from the motor and the optical sensor by means of a
thin elastic silicone rubber membrane. In fact, the membrane
prevents the fluid to wet the contact interface between stator
and rotor and consequently to decrease the friction coefficient,
thus lowering the generated torque under the minimum level
required for proper scanning operation. Moreover, the fluid
between the LED and the photodiode of the optical sensor
could modify the light path preventing the correct operation of
the sensor. All the components described so far are enclosed in
a suitable plastic case, as shown in Fig. 1.
Figure 3. Probe prototype photo: the transducer and the membrane
arrangement under the dome.
The elastic membrane is glued to the rotor near the
rotational axis to minimize the parasitic counter-torque due to
the elastic reaction of the membrane. The proposed
arrangement is a good trade-off between elastic counter-torque
and hydrodynamic losses. Figure 2 shows the assembled
prototype, with the plastic dome mounted and filled with the
matching liquid. Figure 3 shows the probe without the dome:
the arrangement of the elastic membrane around the ultrasound
transducer is visible. Figure 4 shows the disassembled probe.
Figure 4. Probe prototype photo: the probe is partially disassembled to show
the internal arrangement: behind the reversed elastic membrane, it is possible
to see the piezomotor glued on the PCB, the optical sensor, and the transducer
coaxial cable.
The probe is connected to a complete echographic system,
whose echographic signal processing and image display
sections have been developed by OPTIKON 2000 S. p. A.,
Roma, Italy. The complete system architecture is shown in
Fig. 5; the pulser/receiver electronics is hosted in a personal
computer, and a suitable software allows us to control imaging
parameters and display.
Figure 5. Block diagram of the echographic system architecture. The
pulser/receiver electronics is hosted on a personal computer, and a suitable
software allows to control imaging parameters and display.
The probe operates in a closed-loop controlled by a
microcontroller (Scenix SX by Parallax, CA, USA), which
controls the motor scanning direction and generates the
synchronization signals for the echographic system. During the
probe rotation, the optical sensor generates a sequence of
digital trigger signals, each signal telling the controller when it
1311
0-7803-8412-1/04/$20.00 (c)2004 IEEE.
0-7803-8412-1/04/$20.00 (c)2004 IEEE.
2004 IEEE International Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics,
and Frequency Control Joint 50th Anniversary Conference
0 50 100 150
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40° SECTOR
SCAN TIME
15.4 ms
SCAN START
ROTOR
ANGLE
(°)
TIME (ms)
SCLERA
IRIS
CILIARY
BODY
LENS
CORNEA
is time to pulse the transducer and successively to acquire the
echoes coming back from the target. The echographic system
uses the acquired single record from the echo signals to build,
after a suitable post-elaboration, a single view line of the
imaging field. After all the view lines have been acquired, post-
processed, and scan converted, they are displayed as a whole in
one usual sector B-mode image. Our echographic system
acquires 256 view lines to build a single frame, at a rate of 15
frames per second. The probe controller circuitry and the
power supply electronics are hosted externally to the personal
computer.
Figure 6. Rotor angle versus time experimental curve. After an acceleration
interval, the rotor scans the 40° sector within about an average 15.4 ms.
Bouncing around the resting position at -20° is due to the elastic membrane
reaction and to the rotational inertia of the transducer-holder-sensor system.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The ability of the scanning probe to scan the desired sector
imaging field within the required frame rate was tested with the
transducer immersed in its matching fluid inside the sealed
dome. Figure 6 shows the experimental angle versus time
curve, computed starting from the measured output of the
incremental optical sensor, which is actually a PWM square
wave. The inverse of the time interval between two subsequent
commutations of the squared wave, multiplied by the angle
step (0.175°) of the optical sensor, yields the instantaneous
rotor angular speed; a successive numerical integration gives
the angle versus time curve. From this curve, it can be seen that
the probe actually scans a wider sector, about 50°, and that the
angular trajectory includes acceleration and deceleration
intervals. In fact, once the rotor reaches each of the scanning
sector ends, the rotor continues its run for a while during
braking. In this way, the effective scan sector is wider than 40°.
It can be also appreciated the fact that, within the desired sector
of 40°, the scanning angular speed is constant with a good
approximation.
Although a constant angular speed is not a stringent
requirement for this scanning system, given that the pulse-
receive synchronism is based on a computed absolute position,
however it indicates a good performance of the piezoelectric
motor and of the overall mechanical arrangement, which
operates quite smoothly.
The curve shows a wide resting interval between two
subsequent scans; the resting intervals indicate that the actual
piezomotor torque exceeds the one strictly required to
accomplish the task of 15 scans per second, and that there is a
power reserve that could be utilized should the motor torque
decrease for aging during the operating life, or used to reject
external inertial disturbances. Alternatively, that power reserve
could be used to increase the scanning rate up to 25 frames per
second.
Figure 7 shows an image acquired with the scanning probe
prototype, without the dome and with the scanning transducer
immersed in a water bath, displaying the fine structures of a pig
eye; in this image, it is possible to appreciate the details of the
anterior chamber, the cornea, surrounded by the external sclera,
the iris, the lens, and the ciliary body. The good quality of the
image, without apparent geometrical artifacts, confirms the
correct operation of the mechanical closed loop scanning
system.
Figure 7. Fine structures of a pig eye: details of the anterior chamber, the
cornea, surrounded by the external sclera, the iris, the lens, and the ciliary
body, imaged with a circular 35 MHz transducer.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
The description of a mechanical scanning probe for high
frequency ophthalmic ecography based on a piezoelectric
motor is provided, and the experimental characterization is
carried out. The probe transducer is fully immersed in a
matching fluid, which is separated from the motor by a elastic
silicone membrane. The scanning probe incorporates an optical
angular sensor and operates within a closed-loop
microprocessor controlled system. The probe is able of
scanning 15 sectors per second as requested for a good image
refresh rate, showing a good power margin to compensate
aging and external disturbances. The angle versus time
experimental curve and the good quality of the obtained
echographic image demonstrate the feasibility and the smooth
operation of employing a piezoelectric motor to drive a fast
mechanical scanning probe. The constructed probe has little
weight and operates in a very silent manner. However, the
1312
0-7803-8412-1/04/$20.00 (c)2004 IEEE.
0-7803-8412-1/04/$20.00 (c)2004 IEEE.
2004 IEEE International Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics,
and Frequency Control Joint 50th Anniversary Conference
prototype appears quite big with respect to other commercial
competitors, due to the room required by the 30 mm diameter
piezomembrane, which is the largest component of the motor.
Currently, a reduction of the overall probe dimensions using a
smaller piezoelectric membrane is under investigation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of MIUR
for the project, and the valuable collaboration of Dr. Giacomo
Pasqualitto and Dr. Claudio Reginelli, both at OPTIKON
2000 S. p. A., Roma, Italy.
REFERENCES
[1] T. A. Ritter, T. R. Shrout, R. Tutwiler, and K. K. Shung, ”A 30-MHz
piezo-composite ultrasound array for medical imaging applications,”
IEEE Trans. on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, vol.
49, n. 2, pp. 217-230, Feb. 2002.
[2] R. Carotenuto, A. Iula, N. Lamberti, M. Pappalardo, “A new low voltage
piezoelectric micromotor based on the stator precessional motion,” IEEE
Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelec., Freq. Contr., vol. 45, n. 5, pp. 1427-1435,
Sept. 1998.
1313
0-7803-8412-1/04/$20.00 (c)2004 IEEE.
0-7803-8412-1/04/$20.00 (c)2004 IEEE.
2004 IEEE International Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics,
and Frequency Control Joint 50th Anniversary Conference
