The world’s smallest Real-Time ultrasound
revolutionises how you see your patients
SEE MORE. DO MORE. NOW.
See More.
Do More.
Now.
Introducing the Signos Real-Time Personal Ultrasound
SEE MORE. DO MORE. NOW.
POCKET-SIZED AND PERSONAL
Designed to make ultrasound easy
17 week pregnancy
INSTANT INSIGHT at the POINT-OF-CARE
Diagnostic imaging—the most common and most needed procedures of which
are X-ray and ultrasound examinations—plays a critical role in surveillance,
prevention, and diagnosis of disease as well as in monitoring treatment.
Signos RT, the world's smallest and most affordable completely portable ultrasound system, now
makes ultrasound technology easy to use – for all users from novice to experienced - and is small
enough to carry in your pocket or wear like a stethoscope. Providing outstanding image quality, this
unique palm-sized device weighs less than 400 grams (14 ounces) and is ideal for quick and simple
point-of-care applications such as e-FAST, pneumothoraces, AAA screening, bladder volumes, basic
pregnancy assessments and ruling in obvious pathology.
Signos RT powers up from sleep mode instantly, ready to use when and wherever you need it.
Use entirely as a stand alone ultrasound system or simply plug the hand-held display unit or
ultrasound probe directly into your Windows based PC, laptop or tablet running the specially designed
SigViewer software, standard with all Signos RT devices. Ideally suited for those occasions
when you need the flexibility of a larger display.
• eFAST scan
• Lung imaging - pleural fluid, pneumothoraces
• Post-void residual bladder volume (automated measurements)
• Basic pregnancy assessments – confirmation scans, FHR, fetal position
• Basic internal organ imaging – gross gall bladder pathology.
• Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) Screening
• Localisation of free fluid in the abdomen and lungs
• Core muscle assessment – TA, pelvic floor
• Basic veterinary applications
Some popular applications of the Signos RT system include:
1
INNOVATIVE AND SIMPLY INDISPENSABLE
80%-90% of diagnostic problems can easily be solved
using basic X-ray and / or ultrasound examinations.
Learn more about Signos Real-Time Personal Ultrasound at
www.signostics.com.au
Easy access to USB port and headphone
jack, touch screen stylus and 4GB
microSD data card (included) which
enables you to store 10,000+ images.
High resolution touch
screen display shows
accurate images and
enables you to easily
and quickly access a
wide range of
applications – Presets,
Scanning Modes,
Depth, Gain,
Measurements, Patient
Information, Text
Annotation and Voice
Recording – for fast
clinical review.
Convenient USB
connection enables
removable probe to be
directly connected to
your Windows based
PC, laptop or tablet
running the
accompanying
SigViewer software.
The ‘S3-5’ transducer provides high resolution images
from superficial areas through to 18cm. The transducer
is interchangeable, enabling future upgrades.
A unique combination of affordability, adaptability and accessibility enables
Signos RT to improve diagnostic accuracy and patient outcomes, while
saving time and money.
SEE MORE. DO MORE. NOW.
A flexible, award winning design with multiple features makes Signos RT an invaluable tool for everyday
use. Offering the convenience of Real-Time B-Mode, M-Mode and PW Doppler imaging, volume
measurements and simple to access presets, Signos RT is the ideal companion for any point-of-care
physician or healthcare professional.
1
SEE MORE. DO MORE. NOW.
SEE MORE. DO MORE. NOW.
• Carry in your pocket
• Instant power on and long-lasting battery
• Reduce procedural complications
• Detect obvious pathology
• Strong, durable and robust design
Reference 1: World Health Organization. Essential Diagnostic Imaging.
Department of Essential Health Technologies.
Available at: http://www.who.int/diagnostic_imaging/en/
Accessed November 28, 2009.
©2013 Signostics Ltd. All rights reserved.
Signos, Signos RT and SigViewer are Trademarks of Signostics Limited
Caution: Federal (USA) law restricts this device to sale by
or on the order of a physician
Weight • 392 grams (13.8 oz)
Dimensions • Display unit: 11.5cm H x 6.8cm W x 2.0cm D
• Display Screen: 6.85cm Hi-res colour LCD
• Probe: 14cm L x ~6cm W x ~3.3cm D
• Connecting cable: 85.8cm L
Transducer • S3-5 Sector Annular –
B/M Mode + PW Doppler
User interface • Touch screen and scroll wheel
• Onscreen alphanumeric keyboard
• Text and Voice Recording
• Optional tablet display
• PictBridge compatible printing
Measurement • Auto Volume Measurements
tools • Linear distance calipers
• Ellipse & polygon area/circumference
• Beats-per-minute (BPM)
Image storage • 4 GB microSD data card (included)
• Urgent Mode internal memory
• USB connection for downloads
Software • SigViewer PC/tablet software
• Backup images/data
• Search and manage database
• Automatic software updates
Battery • 75% charge in 2 hours
• 100% charge in 3 hours
• Lasts up to 30 hours
(based on four 1-minute scans/hour)
• Over 120 minutes of continuous scanning
SPECIFICATIONS
Signostics Limited
1284 South Road
Clovelly Park, SA 5042 Australia
+61 (8) 7424-0600
1-800-SIGNOS (1-800-744667)
sales@signostics.com.au
www.signostics.com.au D03557 Rev 4.0
A revolution improving
the Quality-of-Care at
the Point-of-Care
The Signos RT Personal
Ultrasound is the world’s smallest
Real-Time ultrasound device,
answering the need for
accurate, affordable, accessible
diagnostic technology.
