A Low-Cost B-Mode USB Ultrasound Probe
WILLIAM D. RICHARD,
1
DAVID M. ZAR
1
AND ROMAN SOLEK
2
1
Z&R Technologies, L.L.C.
282 Birchwood Crossing Lane
Maryland Heights, MO 63043
wdr@zandrtech.com
2
Interson Corporation, Inc.
7026 Koll Center Parkway, #201
Pleasanton, CA 94566
TheUniversal Serial Bus(USB)isnow theubiquitousinterfacebus ofchoice forconnectingperipher-
als to personal computers and laptops. USB 2.0 is a half-duplex bus running at 480 Mb/s and each pe-
ripheral can draw as much as 500 mA of current at a nominal 5 V from the USB connector. We have
developed a family of USB-based, B-mode probes that connect directly to a personal computer or laptop
andthat drawas littleas250mA(1.25W)whenformingten5MHzimages/second. Thepulser/receiver,
high voltage supply, analog-to-digital converter, servo and USB interface are implemented on a small
circuit board inside the probe body. After raw data are transferred to the computer, gain compensation,
interpolation, filtering and other data processing are performed by the host processor. This gives flexi-
bility to developers and allows enhancements to the system to be incorporated via software updates. In
addition, the raw data are available for storage and later postprocessing. There are several advantages to
this architectural approach to B-mode imaging, including low cost, portability and optimal sig-
nal-to-noise performance. This paper describes the advantages of the architecture of the probe family,
discusses the hardware/software division of the required processing steps and presents example images
from a 12.5 MHz ophthalmic probe.
Key words: B-mode; low-cost; probe; ultrasound; universal serial bus.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Universal Serial Bus (USB)
1
is now the ubiquitous interfacebus of choice for connect-
ing peripherals to personal computers and laptops. USB 2.0 is a half-duplex bus running at
480 Mb/s, and each peripheral can draw as much as 500 mA of current at a nominal 5 V from
the USB connector.
The low-cost B-mode ultrasound probes described here are mechanical sector ultrasonic
imaging probes that connect directly to a host computer via the USB without the need for ad-
ditional interface boxes or power supplies. These probes leverage the availability of
power-efficient scan heads produced by Interson Corporation of Pleasanton, California.
The pulser/receiver, high voltage supply, analog-to-digital converter, servo and USB inter-
face are all contained inside the probe body. This enables the host, via software running on
the host, to form real-time ultrasonic images of human tissue or other materials without the
need for any additional internal or external electronics, power supplies or support devices of
any type. A unique feature of these probes is that they draw power exclusively from the host
ULTRASONIC IMAGING 30, 21-28 (2008)
21 0161-7346/08 $18.00
Copyright 2008 by Dynamedia, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
at TELECOM & Man SudParis PARENT on July 7, 2015
uix.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
via the USBand that all of the required electronicsare integrated into the probe. Theconnec-
tion between the probe and the host is simply a passive USB cable.
The probe transmits digitized, logarithmically-compressed, envelope-detected ultra-
sound echo data from a single transducer in the probe to the host where Time Gain Compen-
sation (TGC),
2
gray-scale mapping and scan conversion
3
are performed in software. The
resultant image is displayed using the graphics subsystem of the host. No beam former or
otherhardware processing subsystemis implemented insidethe probe or the host. The probe
contains an interface to the peripheral bus, a servo loop for controlling the motor, a
high-voltage power supply, an ultrasonic pulser, a Transmit/Receive Switch (T/R SW), a
preamplifier, a logarithmic amplifier for dynamic range compression, an Analog-to-Digital
Converter (A/D) and electronics for control and power supply generation and regulation.
Power is supplied via the USB cable for all of the electronics in the probe, including the mo-
tor.
Figure 1 shows three members of the probe family. The 12.5 MHz probe (Fig. 1a) is de-
signed for use in ophthalmic applications, and two example eye images taken using the
probe are shown in figure 2. Figure 2a is an image of a normal human eye while figure 2b
shows an image of an eye with a retinal tumor. The 5 MHz General Purpose (GP) probe is
shown in figure 1b. The 7.5 MHz endocavity probe (Fig. 1c) is designed for use in
transrectal and vaginal applications and an image of a triple yolk sack from a woman carry-
ing triplets taken using this probeis shown in figure 3. Thehead of afetus is clearly visible in
the center yolk sack.
Figure 3 also illustrates the graphical user interface (GUI) implemented by the standard
software application. The user can change the gain, intensity, contrast and zoom settings ap-
plied to an image, change the pulser power setting, saveimagesand cine’ loops, print images
and make measurements of anatomical structures. This example GUI is built on top of a set
22 RICHARD ET AL
FIG. 1 (a) 12.5 MHz ophthalmic probe; (b) 5 MHz general-purpose probe; (c) 7.5 MHz endocavity probe.
(a)
(b)
(c)
at TELECOM & Man SudParis PARENT on July 7, 2015
uix.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
of low-level Dynamic Linked Libraries (DLLs) that are supplied to Original Equipment
Manufacturers (OEMs) who wish to develop their own GUI.
USB ULTRASOUND PROBE 23
FIG. 2 (a) Image of a normal human eye taken with the 12.5 MHz ophthalmic probe; (b) Image of a human eye
with a retinal tumor taken with the 12.5 MHz ophthalmic probe. (Photograph courtesy of Accutome.)
(a)
(b)
at TELECOM & Man SudParis PARENT on July 7, 2015
uix.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
II. PHYSICAL IMPLEMENTATION
A photograph showing the two sides of the small 0.9 inch by 3.4 inch circuit board
mounted inside the handle of ophthalmic probe of figure 1 is shown in figure 4. The circuit
board makes extensive use of surface mount components, and a ‘mini-B’ type connector is
used to connect the back of the circuit board, which extends out the back of the probe handle,
to the host PC or laptop.
A block diagram of the circuitry on the circuit board is shown in figure 5. The ‘USB IC
W/8051 CPU’ block represents a Cypress CY7C68014A USB 2.0 interface IC.
4
This IC has
24 RICHARD ET AL
FIG. 3 Image of the triple yolk sack of a woman carrying triplets taken with the 7.5 MHz endocavity probe.
FIG. 4 The two sides of the 0.9 inch by 3.4 inch circuit board mounted inside the probe handle.
at TELECOM & Man SudParis PARENT on July 7, 2015
uix.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
a complete USB 2.0 interface, 4 KB of Static RAM (SRAM) for buffering high-speed USB
data and an 8051 microprocessor with 16 KB of code/data SRAM all integrated into a single
chip. ThisIC runs embedded 8051 codestored in the I
2
C Bus Serial PROM (SPROM) or that
has been downloaded from the host via a process called ‘ReNumeration.’
In figure 5, there is an implied mechanical connection between the motor/encoder shaft
and the transducer that enables the transducer to pivot as the motor shaft turns. An encoder,
either magnetic or optical depending on probe type, is used to provide feedback of motor
shaft (and therefore transducer) position to the 8051 inside the USB IC and to the Complex
Programmable Logic Device (CPLD). When imaging, a software routine running on the
8051 microprocessor implements a servo control loop by monitoring the Index and Pulse
signals from the encoder. The CPU generates a Pulse Width Modulated (PWM) control sig-
nal that is used to drive a buck regulator to produce the correct motor voltage for the rota-
tional speed desired. If the motor is running too slowly, the PWM signal is used to increase
the motor voltage produced by the buck regulator, and, conversely, if the motor is running
too fast, the PWM signal is used to decrease the motor voltage.
The Index signal produced by the encoder is asserted once per motor rotation. The Pulse
signal is asserted 512 times per rotation, or 256 times per left/right or right/left transducer
sweep. The CPLD monitors the Pulse signal and performs a data acquisition cycle each time
a new position (angle) is found. For each Pulse, the CPLD signals the bipolar pulser to pulse
at one of several different available pulse frequencies and then transfers 2,048 bytes of data
from theAnalog-to-Digital(A/D) converter to the high-speed datatransfer buffers insidethe
USB IC. This data acquisition process happens without intervention from the 8051 or the re-
mote host. Once in the buffers, the data samples can be read over the USB by the host.
The bipolar pulser produces positive/negative high voltage pulses that can be as large as
±100 V. The dual supply voltages required by the bipolar pulser are produced by the High
Voltage Power Supply (HVPS). A Digital-to-Analog Converter (DAC) attached to the I
2
C
Bus is used to set the peak voltage produced by the HVPS. The I
2
C Bus commands used to
control the DAC are generated by the 8051.
USB ULTRASOUND PROBE 25
FIG. 5 Block diagram of the circuitry on the 0.9 inch by 3.4 inch circuit board showing connections to the
Interson Corporation scan head.
at TELECOM & Man SudParis PARENT on July 7, 2015
uix.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
An automatic Transmit/Receive Switch (T/R SW) is used to connect the transducer inside
the probe head assembly to either the bipolar pulser or to the preamplifier. When the bipolar
high voltage pulse is produced by the pulser, the T/R switch automatically blocks the high
voltage from damaging the preamplifier while delivering the pulse to the transducer via a
short (3-4 inch) coax. When the bipolar pulser is not pulsing, the automatic T/R Switch con-
nects the transducer coax to the preamplifier and disconnects the pulser.
The low noise preamplifier provides 20 dB of gain, and the output of the preamplifier drives a
passive, four-pole, band-limiting Low Pass Filter (LPF). The output of the LPF feeds a Log-
arithmic Amplifier (LOG) with 100 dB of dynamic range. By compressing the dynamic
range, it is unnecessary to implement Time Gain Compensation (TGC) inside the probe.
TGC functions are performed in the host by adding to and subtracting from the logarith-
mically compressed raw data.
2
The logarithmic amplifier also performs envelope detection,
eliminating the need for digitizing radiofrequency (rf) data. This approach to ultrasonic im-
agingalsoeliminatestheneedforthebeamformerrequiredbyarray-basedimagingsystems.
The log-compressed, envelope-detected ultrasound return echo is digitized using an 8-bit
A/D converter sampling at either 30 or 48 MHz. To support different imaging depths,
down-sampling is done by the CPLD. Down-sampling by 2, 3 and 4 is currently supported
for each sample rate, resulting in effective sample rates of 30, 15, 10 and 7.5 MHz (when the
30 MHz clock is used) and 48, 24, 16 and 12 MHz (when the 48 MHz clock is used). After
down-sampling the CPLD always writes 2,048 bytes into the buffers inside the USB IC. For
512´512 pixel images, 2,048 samples per return echo corresponds to a 4´ oversampling rate
as described in our earlier work.
3
Assuming the speed of sound in tissue is 1,540 m/s, 2,048 samplestaken at 7.5 MHz corre-
sponds to a maximum imaging depth of 21 cm while 2,048 samples taken at 48 MHz corre-
sponds to a minimum imaging depth of 3.3 cm. While there is no hard constraint that only
these eight (8) sample frequencies be used, this approach does simplify theimplementation.
The 30/48 MHz clock is produced at the IFCLK output pin of the USB IC and the clock
frequency can be selected via software. Several controls signals from the USB IC are used to
set the pulse frequency, down-sampling rate and other parameters inside the CPLD. The
CPLD uses the 30/48 MHz clock to produce the pulse control signals required by the bipolar
pulser. The high and low times of the bipolar pulse produced by the pulser can each be 1, 2, 3
or 4 clock periods in length, resulting in single-cycle bipolar pulses that are 2, 4, 6 or 8 clock
periods in total length. These pulse periods correspond to bipolar pulse ‘frequencies’ of 15,
7.5, 5.0 or 3.75 MHz (when the 30 MHz clock isused) or 24, 12,8.0 or 6.0 MHz (when the 48
MHz clock is used).
A commercial linear regulator IC with integrated power switches and low quiescent cur-
rent requirements designed for USB applications is used to produce the 3.3 V digital and 3.3
V analog voltage supplies required, as well as to switch the power to the encoder on and off.
The 3.3 V digital supply powers the USB IC, the CPLD, the SPROM and the DAC. The 3.3
V analog supply powers the preamp, thelogarithmicamplifier and the A/D. In USB suspend
mode, the ‘shutdown’ signal turns off the 5 V power to the encoder and the 3.3 V analog sup-
ply. A separate P-Channel Field Effect Transistor (PFET) is used to turn off power to the
HVPS when the system is in suspend mode or simply in frozen mode and not imaging.
The power for all of the circuitry inside the probe, as well as that required by the motor, is
obtained from the USB cable. At most, a USB 2.0 compliant peripheral is allowed to draw ½
amp at a nominal 5 V from the USB cable. The 5 MHz General Purpose (GP) probe draws ¼
amp from the USB cable, which is equivalentto 1.25 W, when forming 20 cmdeep images at
10 frames/second (5 revolutions per second on the motor). The smaller ophthalmic probe of
figure 1 uses a smaller, less efficient motor and, consequently, slightly more power, al-
though it operates well within the 2.5 W power envelope set by the USB2.0 specification.
26 RICHARD ET AL
at TELECOM & Man SudParis PARENT on July 7, 2015
uix.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
III. DISCUSSION
There are several advantages to this architectural approach to B-mode imaging, including
low cost and portability. Their low (retail) cost of a few thousand dollars has enabled the use
of these USB probes in many applications for which traditional ultrasound systems have
been considered too costly. One example is the use of a low-cost USB ultrasound probe to
provide visualbiofeedback to strokevictims relearning to controlmuscles. Theability to see
muscle fibers contract during physical therapy sessions has been shown to have tremendous
benefits,
5
and the availability of a low-cost ultrasound probe puts this technology within the
reach of almost every physical therapist.
Since even low-end laptops are capable of forming images in real time using these probes,
it is possible to image everything from soldiers on the battlefield to dolphins from a boat
dock (Fig. 6) with nothing more than a laptop and a USB probe.
Low cost and portability, however, are not the only advantages to this approach to ultra-
sonic imaging. Placing the pulser/receiver within a few inches of the transducer eliminates
signal loss in long cables and provides optimal signal-to-noise performance compared to
more traditional implementations. After raw data are transferred to the computer, gain com-
pensation, interpolation, filtering and other data processing are performed by the host pro-
cessor. This gives flexibility to developers and allows enhancements to the system to be
incorporated via software updates. In addition, the raw data are available for storage and
later postprocessing.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
The ubiquitous universal serial bus, coupled with the processing power available on mod-
ern PCs and laptops, has enabled the development of a complete, low cost B-mode imaging
USB ULTRASOUND PROBE 27
FIG. 6 Photograph of a dolphin imaged from a boat dock in Hawaii using a 5 MHz general-purpose USB probe
and a standard laptop. (Photograph courtesy of Direct Medical Systems.)
at TELECOM & Man SudParis PARENT on July 7, 2015
uix.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
system based on a self-contained USB ultrasound probe. When coupled with a laptop, the
USB probe and laptop form a complete, easily-portable imaging system. With innovative
hardware and software design, image quality acceptable for a wide range of applications can
be achieved within the limits of the 2.5 W USB total power envelope. Many applications of
ultrasound are now possible that were not possible previously due to the low cost of the USB
ultrasound probe and of modern PCs and laptops.
REFERENCES
1. Compaq Computer Corporation, Hewlett-Packard Company, Intel Corporation, Lucent Technologies, Inc.,
Microsoft Corporation, NEC Corporation, Koninklijke Philips Electronics N.V. Universal Serial Bus Specification
Revision 2.0 (2000).
2. Richard WD. A new time-gain correction method for standard B-mode ultrasound imaging, IEEE Trans Med
Imag 8, 283-285 (1989).
3. Richard WD, Arthur RM. Real-time ultrasonic scan conversion via linear interpolation of oversampled vec-
tors, Ultrasonic Imaging 16, 109-123 (1994).
4. Cypress Semiconductor Corporation, “EZ-USB FX2LP
TM
USB Microcontroller Datasheet,” Cypress Docu-
ment Number 38-08032 Rev I, June 1, 2005.
5. Whittaker JL, Teyhen DS, Elliott JM, et al. Rehabilitative ultrasound imaging: understanding the technology
and its application, J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 37, 434-449 (2007).
28 RICHARD ET AL
at TELECOM & Man SudParis PARENT on July 7, 2015
uix.sagepub.com
Downloaded from
