Mir/7a
United States Patent [191
I
[11] 4,149,419
Connell, Jr. et a1. [45] Apr. 17, 1979
[54] ULTRASONIC TRANSDUCER PROBE 3,927,661 12/1975 Takemura 73/621 X
4,034,744 7/1977 Goldberg ............................ 128/2 V‘
[75] Inventors: Raymond S. Connell, Jr.; John M.
Santacroce, both of San Jose, Calif. Primary Examiner-James J. Gill
[73] Assignee: Smith Kline Instruments, Inc., [57] ABSTRACT
l'f. ‘
Sunnyvale’ Cal An ultrasonic transducer probe having a sealed rotor
[21] APPL N°~= 854,902 housing, a plurality of transducers mounted on a rotor
[22] Filed. No“ 25, 1977 disposed in said housing. A rotor shaft mounts the rotor
2 and extends through the housing. A drive assembly
[51] Int- Cl‘ """""""""""" G01N 29/04; A6313 10/ including commutating and position indicating means
[52] us‘ Cl‘ """""""""""" 1721/622% receives said housing and rotor shaft and serves to drive
_ / ’ ’ / the rotor, commutate electrical energy to and from said
[58] Field of Search ................. 73/639, 641, 626, 621, . . . . .
73/633 634 625 644' 128/2 V 205 Z transducers and indicate the angular posltlon of said
’ ’ ’ ’ ’ rotor. A handle including means for driving said drive
[56] References Cited assembly is attached to said drive assembly to position
U_S_ PATENT DOCUMENTS ' the rotor housing and drive assembly against the body
the rotate said rotor to cause the transducers to scan a
3,130,577 4/1964 Cowan ................................... 73/633 secto'f'la‘f'the‘?‘dad
3,423,991 1/1969 Collins ....... 73/639 y‘
3,714,817 2/1973 Miller ............. 73/639
3,779,234 12/1973 Eggleton et al. ............... 128/2 V 8 Claims, 10 Drawing Figures
6 _ 7
44 50486066644:l52‘l
53 - _ 6|
I 5 4| __ _-4‘ T _ 63
L_ 56 7
4s — i 384
52 - — —_ —
55 4? 43 ~_ _
e5 _
79 ,
s
66 _
67 ©
3 2a - |i ' h 3
l6 .' " 27
26' y | I 14
24
4 ' " 4
2| *‘ "' I3
‘I a I ll
19 ' l _
< IB
‘ \l?
U.S. Patent Apr. 17, 1979 Sheet 1 of 5 4,149,419
FIG-l
US. Patent Apr. 17, 1979 Sheet 2 of5 4,149,419
ill.
2
44 5O 48 6O 66 64 42 6
FIG-Z
US. Patent Apr. 17, 1979 Sheet 3 of5 4,149,419
US. Patent Apr. "17, 1979 Sheet4 0f5 4,149,419
m
37 38 2O
US. Patent Apr. 17, 1979 Sheet 5 of5 4,149,419
g SYSTEM x9‘ ;
CLOCK / I03
r
ULTRASOUND SPOT
XTMR-RECVR v 'NTERFACE WOBBLE MAM
9|
_J 9 II
"X
R MULTIPLIER
89 98 V 1IOI
7 2 R I ll
SYN . SWEEP 'Y
__.GENERA R ,eENERAToRs 9 MULTIPLIER
1102
88~
‘ 406
TR DUCER OPERATOR
TOR CONTROLS
CONTROL MODE
8?) ‘ =
b DATA CONDITIONING ‘077 VIDEO
AND TAPE
COMPOSITE VIDEO
GENERATOR RECORDER
96S ' PM
DISPLAY DATA/SYNC.
DATA
SWITCH SEPARATOR
FIG a 297 2
III "3
A.
"2
BL/
C.
54 54
a m a =
56\
56
7|~
72 56
56 ___ 73
“" ‘~74
751ml
L324 F/6._/0
4,149,419
1
ULTRASONIC TRANSDUCER PROBE
BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION
This invention relates generally to an ultrasonic trans
ducer probe for use in transmitting and receiving ultra
sonic energy to and from a body being scanned and
more particularly to a probe suitable for use in an ultra
sonic sector scanning system.
In recent years, ultrasonic scanning of regions of the
human body have found wide applications. Among
advantages of such scanning systems is that the energy
required is low, thereby reducing the possibility of in
jury to a patient. There are no radiation side effects. The
body is not invaded.
As is known, in such systems the ultrasound energy is
transmitted in a beam of pulses each followed by a
relatively long interval where no transmission occurs.
During this interval the pulse energy is transmitted
through the body. Whenever a pulse of energy strikes a
boundary between two substances having different
acoustic impedance, a portion of the ultrasound energy
is re?ected. Some of the re?ected energy returns as an
echo to the transmitting transducer. The beam produces
additional echoes from deeper interfaces. The crystals
which serve as transmitting transducers also serve as
receiving transducers to convert the re?ected ultra
sound energy into electrical signals. These signals are
amplified and displayed as static or dynamic patterns on
a cathode ray tube. The relative position of the inter
faces in the body are displayed.
A particular type of scanner used is a sector scanner.
A sector scanner generally comprises an ultrasonic
transducer (piezoelectric element) which is mounted to
be driven. The drive moves the transducer, generally in
the form of a ?at circular object, back and forth in an
arc scanning motion. During this process the transducer
is pulsed with high voltage pulses at pulse repetition
rates in the order of 3000 Hz. These pulses cause the
piezoelectric element to mechanically ring thereby
emitting high frequency sound waves in a beam. As the
transducer scans, it forms a plurality ofbeams in a fan or
sector shape. The beams impinge upon the structure
within the body and when differences in acoustic impe
dance exist, energy is partially re?ected back to the
transducer element to cause the transducer to mechani
cally vibrate. At this point, the transducer element acts
like a receiver and converts these mechanical vibrations
to electrical energy. This energy is ampli?ed and pro
cessed so that it can be displayed on a cathode ray tube.
The mechanical driving arrangement not only drives
the transducer but also includes means for generating an
electrical output representative of transducer position.
The electrical output from the driving arrangement is
processed and utilized to create horizontal and vertical
signals to drive the vertical and horizontal de?ection
circuits of a cathode ray tube. The signals from the
ultrasonic transducer are used to control the intensity of
the cathode ray tube beam. The resultant image is a
15
20
25
40
45
sector shaped representation of the internal organs of 60
the body.
Another prior art system which allows real time ex
amination of internal organs of the body such as the
heart employs a catheter which has a rotating tip with a
plurality of transducers. The transducers are selectively
connected to a pulser to transmit ultrasonic sound into
the body and to receive echoes therefrom. The echo
pulses are processed and applied to a cathode ray tube
65
2
whereby to provide sequential representations of the
area at a rate which is dependent on the speed of rota
tion of the transducers and with a resolution which is
dependent upon the pulse rate.
In copending application Ser. No. 807,438, entitled
“Ultrasonic Transducer Probe” and assigned to the
same assignee, there is described a rotary transducer
probe including a head adapted to house drive means
including bevel gears, commutating means including
sliding contacts and position sensing means in the form
of a light source and photodiode. Although the probe
described in said copending application is satisfactory,
the drive means introduces some jitter due to the en
gagement of the bevel gear teeth. The sliding contacts
are subject to wear.
OBJECTS AND SUMMARY OF THE
INVENTION
It is a general object of the present invention to pro
vide an improved ultrasonic transducer probe.
It is another object of the present invention to pro
vide a probe including transducers mounted on a belt
driven rotor mounted in a sealed housing.
It is a further object of the present invention to pro
vide an ultrasonic transducer probe which efficiently
couples ultrasonic energy between the transducers and
the body being examined.
It is a further object of the present invention to pro
vide a continuous position sensing of a transducer rotor
so that the transducer position may be accurately con
trolled by a servo system.
It is a further object of the present invention to pro
vide an ultrasonic transducer probe which includes a
rotor having a plurality oftransducer elements mounted
on a rotor disposed in a sealed housing and rotary trans
former means for electrically coupling electrical energy
to and from said transducers.
It is another object of the present invention to pro
vide an ultrasonic transducer probe including a plural
ity of transducers mounted on a rotor and saturable
reactors for selectively connecting said transducers to
associated electrical circuits.
It is still another object of the present invention to
provide an ultrasonic transducer probe including a
rotor disposed in a sealed housing ?lled with a ?uid for
coupling energy between the transducers and the body
to which the housing is applied with the housing con?g
ured to minimize the effect of ultrasound energy re
?ected from the housing walls.
The foregoing and other objects of the invention are
achieved by a probe which includes a rotor housing, a
rotor having a plurality oftransducers disposed thereon
mounted for rotation within said housing and including
a shaft extending from said housing, a drive assembly
including commutating and position indicating'means
adapted to receive said housing and drive said rotor,
couple electrical energy to and from said transducers
and indicate the position of the rotor, and means
adapted to be detachably secured to said drive assembly
to drive the rotor.
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS
FIG. 1 is a perspective view showing an ultrasonic
transducer probe in accordance with the present inven
tion.
FIG. 2 is a view, partly in section, showing the trans
ducer probe assembly of FIG. 1.
4,149,419
3
FIG. 3 is a sectional view taken generally along the
line 3-3 of FIG. 2.
FIG. 4 is a sectional view taken generally along the
line 4-4 of FIG. 3.
FIG. 5 is a sectional view taken generally along the
line 5——5 of FIG. 2.
FIG. 6 is a sectional view taken generally along the
line 6-6 of FIG. 2.
FIG. 7 is a sectional view taken generally along the
line 7-7 of FIG. 2.
FIG. 8 is a block diagram of an electrical system
suitable for use in connection with the probe of FIGS.
1-7.
FIG. 9 is a timing diagram showing the waveforms at
various portions of the system of FIG. 8.
FIG. 10 is a schematic circuit diagram illustrating the
transducers, the rotary transformer and saturable reac
tors and the position sensing means.
DESCRIPTION OF PREFERRED
EMBODIMENTS '
Referring to FIG. 1, the probe includes a handle 11
which is detachably secured to a scanning head desig
nated generally by the numeral 12 by means ofa ring 13
which has threads 14 adapted to engage threads 16
formed on the end of the head 12, FIG. 2. The handle
houses a motor 17 suitably mounted therein and having
a shaft 18 extending through and journalled to the
round block 19 secured to the end of the handle 11. The
block 19 is held in place by means of a circular plate 21
and screws 22, FIGS. 2 and 4. The shaft engages and
drives the cross-shaped coupler 20. The block 19 also
serves to securely mount electrical connectors 23 and
24 which are adapted to engage the female connectors
26 and 27 supported on the threaded block 28 mounted
at the end of the head 12. The block 28 includes spaced
bearings 29 and 31 with a beveled spring 32 which urges
them apart, FIG. 6. The bearings receive shaft 34. A
pulley 36 is mounted at one end of the shaft. The other
end of the shaft includes a coupler 37 having two slots
forming four ?ngers 38 which extend into and engage
with the cross-like member 20. Thus, energization ofthe
motor in the handle serves to rotate the pulley 36 in the
end of the head.
Thus, the handle includes means for attaching the
handle to the head and providing mechanical connec
tion between the head and driving motor and electrical
connection between equipment associated with the han
dle and the head for purposes to be presently described.
The scanning head includes a rotary transducer hous
ing 41 and a drive assembly 42. The transducer housing
41 is detachably secured to the drive assembly by
threads 43. The housing includes an outer conical
shaped shell 44 which has a taper of about 5°. The shell
end mounts a bearing 46 at its end and includes threads
47 at the other end to receive a plug 48. The plug 48
carries a bearing 49 and seal 51.
A rotor shaft 52 has one end mounted in bearing 46
and its other end extends through the bearing 49. The
shaft mounts a rotary transducer assembly including
rotor 53 adapted to mount a plurality of transducers 54,
in this instance, four such transducers at 90°. The outer
surface of each transducer is concave to provide a fo
cusing action for the emitted ultrasonic energy. The
plug includes threaded openings 50 and 55 which re
ceive sealing screws 60 and 65 and provide for ?lling
the interior of the housing with an ultrasound transmit
ting fluid such as ethylene glycol and water. This solu
l0
15
25
30
35
45
50
55
60
65
4
tion substantially matches the body impedance whereby
the ultrasound energy travels efficiently to and from the
body. The cup-shaped housing walls are inclined at an
angle or tapered with respect to the transducers to mini
mize reverberations due to re?ection ofenergy from the
walls. The wall thickness is substantially one-half wave
length at the ultrasound frequency to increase transmis
sion. The outer and inner surfaces of the wall have
common centers whereby the emitted and received
ultrasound energy is not refracted.
The drive assembly includes a housing 61 which
houses the drive and the commutating and positioning
means. The drive includes a spool 62 which is secured
to the shaft 52 by means of a set screw 63, FIG. 5. One
end of the spool includes a pulley 64 adapted to receive
belt 66 which extends towards the handle over spaced
idler pulleys 67 and over the driven pulley 36 previ
ously described. Thus, when the motor is energized, it
serves to drive the belt to rotatably drive the spool and,
in turn, drive the shaft 52 and rotor 53 with its transduc
ers 54. The other end of the spool includes a housing for
a plurality of saturable reactors 56 which are spaced
equally around the periphery thereof and held in place
in notches 57 by means of a plate 58 secured to the
pulley face. The saturable reactors are connected in
series one to each of the transducers as more clearly
shown in FIG. 10. The other end of the transducers and
the other end of the saturable reactors are connected in
common to the lines 71 and 72, respectively. The lines
71 and 72 are connected to the ends of the primary
winding 73 of transformer 74 as shown.
The primary winding 73 of the transformer is
mounted on the outside of a hollow member 76 and
rotates with the shaft and rotor. A stationary secondary
winding 75 is mounted in drive housing on a cylinder
77. It is mounted within the hollow member to be cou
pled to winding 73 and has its leads extending out
wardly to the connector 24. The windings 73 and 75
form a rotary transformer which couple electrical sig
nals into and out of the transducers.
In accordance with the present invention, there is
provided a permanent magnet 80 which includes a pair
of spaced pole pieces 78 and 79 which straddle the
toroid mounting member. The ends of the pole pieces
extend approximately 90“ around the circumference. As
each saturable reactor 56 comes into the magnetic ?eld
produced between the pole pieces, its reluctance is re
duced and signals can pass freely between the transduc
ers through the winding 75. In this way signals coupled
to the secondary of the transformer are coupled from
the primary through the saturable reactor having low
reluctance to the associated ultrasonic transducer. Pref
erably, the magnet extends over an angle somewhat less
than the switching arc to minimize switching overlap
between transducers. For example, if four transducers
are employed, the magnet arc is 90° less approximately
7° to provide a scan angle of substantially 83°.
The drive head also includes means for generating
signals indicative of the position of the rotary trans
ducer whereby to provide signals to a servo control.
Preferably, the output signals are of a triangular wave
shape. The signals are generated by means of a transpar
ent disc 81 which has a plurality of concentric opaque
rings 82 formed thereon as by photoetching. The rings
82 vary in thickness from substantially zero thickness to
substantially full thickness, FIG. 7. Associated with the
transparent disc 81 is a light source 83 and a photodetec
tor 84 disposed on opposite sides. Thus, the signals from
4,149,419
5
the photodetector will be maximum when the thin por
tions ofthe circles intercept the light, while they will be
minimum when the thick portions of the circles inter
cept the light to give a triangular waveshaped signal.
Thus, it is seen that there has been provided a trans
ducer probe including a plurality ofultrasonic transduc
ers mounted upon a rotor in a transmitting ?uid and
rotating in a plane substantially parallel to a plane
through the axis of the handle. The rotary probe is
driven by a belt providing a smooth drive. Means are
provided for commutating signals between a rotary
transformer and the transducers thereby eliminating the
need for contacts and switches. A position sensing disc
is provided which gives an output electrical wave of
triangular waveshape.
The transducer is schematically shown in FIG. 8
connected to an electrical system for providing the
motor control signals and the sensor display.
The output of the phototransducer 84 is applied to a
motor control 87 to which is also applied a reference
frequency along the line 88 from sync generator 89
which serves to synchronize the operation of the over
all system as will be presently described. Input tothe
sync generator is from a system clock 91 which may
include a crystal together with appropriate dividers to
provide a control frequency to the sync generator 89.
The output of the line 88 may, for example, be a 60
Hertz output which is applied to the motor control. The
output pulses from the phototransducer 84 are em
ployed in a servo system to servo control operation of
the motor 17 and to control the position of the rotor 53
whereby the position of the transducer is accurately
determined as the rotor rotates. Ultrasonic pulses are
applied sequentially to the individual transducers at a
high rate so that they scan a plurality of lines in a fan or
sector as the member rotates. This is schematically
shown in FIG. 10 where the transducers 54 are shown
with one side connected to a common input line 72 with
the other side adapted to be connected to ground 71 as
the rotor rotates by the action of the saturable reactors,
previously described. Only one of the transducers is
connected during each 90° of rotation. The arrange
ment is such that as one transducer scans a 90° sector,
the next transducer begins to scan the same 90° sector in
sequence.
The sync generator 89 applies trigger pulses along the
line 91 to an interface 92 which drives a suitable trans
mitter and receiver 93. For example, the transmitter
receiver may be an Ekoline 20A/B which serves to
receive trigger pulses and transmit ultrasonic pulses for
application to the transducer. The transducer receives
the echoes from the interfaces and the receiver pro
cesses the same and provides ultrasound data along the
line 94. The ultrasound data on the line 94 is applied to
a data conditioning and composite video generator 96
and to a display data switch 97. At the beginning of
each trigger pulse, the sync generator 89 applies a sync
pulse to the sweep generator 98 which serves to form a
plurality of sawtooth voltage waves such as shown in
FIG. 9C. The sawtooth voltage waves provide the
so-called “R” sweep voltage which is modi?ed as will
be presently described. In addition, the sync generator
serves to generate a trigger pulse responsive to the
output from the phototransducer 84 to thereby indicate
the beginning of a sweep. This trigger pulse serves to
form a sawtooth voltage such as shown in FIG. 9B
which provides the 0 sweep voltage which is also modi
?ed. The R and 0 sweep voltages are then applied to X
15
25
30
35
45
55
65
6
and Y multipliers 101 and 102 which provide outputs
equal to X=R sin 0 and Y=R cos 0, respectively. This
causes the sweep of the oscilloscope to be such as
shown at 103 comprising a 90° scan with a plurality of
scan lines 104 each beginning with the application of a
pulse to the transducer and each ?eld or scan represent
ing 90° rotation of the transducer. The number of lines
is, therefore, directly dependent upon the frequency of
the ultrasonic pulses which are applied to the transduc
ers. The ultrasound data on the line 94 is applied
through the display switch to the monitor along the line
106 and serves to modulate the intensity of the beam
whereby the scan will be modulated in accordance with
the ultrasound data which is received as a result of
re?ections from the interfaces. The speed of rotation of
the rotor 53 determines the number offields or displays
which are available per unit oftime while the number of
pulses applied determines the number of lines. It is ap
parent, however, that the pulse rate is limited by the
depth which the scan must reach since there must be
enough time between pulses to receive echoes from the
deepest portion observed.
The sync signals from the sync generator 89 corre
sponding both to the horizontal and vertical sync sig
nals applied to the sweep generators are also applied to
a data conditioner 96. The data conditioner also re
ceives the ultrasound data. The unit processes the data
in a manner similar to a television composite signal
generator. It provides a composite video signal on the
line 107. The signal is illustrated at FIG. 9A and in
cludes vertical blanking pulses 111, horizontal sync
pulses 112 and the ultrasound data 113 for each scan
line.
The video recorder may be any conventional video
recorder such as a helical scan recorder which serves to
record video signal. The rotation ofthe recording heads
and the motion of the tape is synchronized with the
timing system of the ultrasonic scanning system
whereby to provide the recording ofsequential ?elds of
information.
During playback, the video recorder composite sig
nal is applied along the line 114 to a data sync separator
116 which separates out the X and Y sync pulses and
applies them to the sweep generator 98 which provides
the appropriate sweep signals through the multipliers
101 and 102 for driving the de?ection circuits of the
cathode ray tube. The separated ultrasound data on the
line 117 is applied to the display switch and directly to
the video display in the same manner as the original
ultrasound pulses to modulate the intensity. Thus, the
playback display is identical to the original display.‘
What is claimed is:
1. An ultrasonic transducer probe for examining a
living body comprising a rotor shaft, a rotor mounted
on said shaft, a plurality of ultrasonic transducers hav
ing a transmitting and receiving face mounted 'on said
rotor with the face directed radially outwardly there
from, a sealed housing adapted to house said rotor and
support said shaft for rotation, said housing including a
thin wall adjacent the transducer face for transmitting
ultrasonic energy to and from said transducers, a cou
pling ?uid ?lling said housing, said fluid having an
acoustic impedance corresponding gei‘ieraily to that of
the body to be examined whereby to efficiently couple
the transducer to the body, means serving to rotate‘ said
shaft and rotor so that the transducers scan through a
predetermined angle, a plurality of saturable reactors
one for each transducer connected in series therewith,
4,149,419
7
means for mounting said saturable reactors for rotation
with said shaft, and means providing a magnetic ?eld to
each of said saturable reactors as they rotate through a
predetermined angle whereby the saturable reactor in
the magnetic ?elds is saturated to lower its impedance
so that it transmits electrical signals, and means con
nected to said saturable reactors serving to supply and
receive electrical signals from the transducers associ
ated with the saturated saturable reactor.
2. An ultrasonic transducer probe as in claim 1 includ
ing position indicating means associated with said shaft,
said position indicating means associated with said
shaft, said position indicating means comprising a trans
parent disc mounted for rotation on said shaft, a plural
ity of concentric opaque circles formed on said disc,
said circles varying in width from a wide portion to a
thin portion, a light source disposed on one side of said
disc and a phototransducer disposed on the other side of
said disc to receive light transmitted through the disc
from the light source whereby to generate electrical
signals corresponding to the light transmitted as the
wide and narrow portions intercept the light.
3. An ultrasonic transducer probe for examining a
living body comprising a rotor shaft, a rotor mounted
on said shaft, a plurality of ultrasonic transducers hav
ing a transmitting and receiving face mounted on said
rotor with the face directed radially outwardly there
from, a sealed housing adapted to house said rotor and
support said shaft for rotation, said housing including a
thin wall adjacent the transducer face for transmitting
ultrasonic energy to and from said transducers, a cou
pling ?uid ?lling said housing, said ?uid having an
acoustic impedance corresponding generally to that of
the body to be examined whereby to ef?ciently couple
the transducer to the body, means serving to rotate said
shaft and rotor so that the transducers scan through a
predetermined angle, and position indicating means
associated with said shaft, said position indicating
means comprising a transparent disc mounted for rota
tion on said shaft, a plurality of concentric opaque cir
cles formed on said disc, said circles varying in width
from a wide portion to a narrow portion, a light source
disposed on one side of said disc and a phototransducer
disposed on the other side of said disc to receive light
transmitted through the disc from the light source
whereby to generate electrical signals corresponding to
the light transmitted as the wide and narrow portions
intercept the light.
4. An ultrasonic transducer probe for examining a
living body comprising a rotor shaft, a rotor mounted
on said shaft, a plurality of ultrasonic transducers hav
ing a transmitting and receiving face mounted on said
rotor with the face directed radially outwardly there
from, a sealed housing adapted to house said rotor and
support said shaft for rotation, said housing including a
thin wall adjacent the transducer face for transmitting
ultrasonic energy to and from said transducers, said thin
wall being at an angle with respect to the face of the
transducers to minimize the effect of re?ection of en~
ergy from the interface between the ?uid and the win
dow, a coupling ?uid ?lling said housing, said ?uid
having an acoustic impedance corresponding generally
to that of the body to be examined whereby to ef?
ciently couple the transducer to the body, and means
25
30
45
55
65
8
serving to rotate said shaft and rotor so that the trans
ducers scan through a predetermined angle.
5. An ultrasonic transducer probe for examining a
living body comprising a rotor shaft, a rotor mounted
on said shaft, a plurality of ultrasonic transducers hav
ing a transmitting and receiving face mounted on said
rotor with the face directed radially outwardly there
from, a sealed housing adapted to house said rotor and
support said shaft for rotation about an axis of rotation,
said housing including a thin wall adjacent the trans
ducer face for transmitting ultrasonic energy to and
from said transducers, said thin wall lying on a conical
surface with the center of the inner and outer surfaces
of the wall on a common line coincident with the axis of
rotation of the transducers whereby to minimize para
lax, a coupling ?uid ?lling said housing, said ?uid hav
ing an acoustic impedance corresponding generally to
that of the body to be examined whereby to ef?ciently
couple the transducer to the body, and means serving to
rotate said shaft and rotor so that the transducers scan
through a predetermined angle.
6. An ultrasonic transducer probe comprising: a scan
ning head including a rotor shaft, a rotor mounted on
said shaft, a plurality of ultrasonic transducers mounted
on said rotor, a sealed housing adapted to house said
rotor with one end of the shaft extending therefrom; a
drive assembly including a housing for driving said
shaft to rotate said rotor, said drive housing‘ and said
sealed housing including means for removably connect
ing said scanning head to said drive housing whereby
scanning heads having desired characteristics can be
interchanged with the drive; a handle associated with
said drive housing to permit placement of said scanning
head on a body to be examined; saturable reactors
mounted to rotate with said shaft, said ultrasonic trans
ducers having ?rst and second terminals, a saturable
reactor having one terminal connected to one terminal
of each of said transducers and mounted on said support
with their other terminal connected in common; means
providing a magnetic ?eld to saturate a reactor passing
therethrough positioned in said housing to cooperate
with each saturable reactor as it rotates therethrough;
and means for applying and receiving signals between
the common terminal of the saturable reactors and the
other terminal of the transducers whereby the trans
ducer associated with a saturated saturable reactor is
connected to said means for applying and receiving
signals.
7. An ultrasonic transducer probe as in claim 6 includ
ing a rotary transformer for coupling the common ter
minal of the saturable reactors and the other terminal of
the transducers to means for applying signals to and
receiving signals from the transducers.
8. An ultrasonic transducer probe as in claim 6 includ
ing position indicating means associated with said shaft,
said position indicating means comprising a transparent
disc mounted for rotation on said shaft, a plurality of
concentric opaque circles formed on said disc, said
circles varying in width from a wide portion to a nar
row portion, a light source disposed on one side of said
disc and a phototransducer disposed on the other side of
said disc to receive light transmitted through the disc
from the light source whereby to generate electrical
signals corresponding to the light transmitted as the
wide and narrow portions intercept the light.
* 10‘ it it i
