This is an archived article.
November 9, 2010
University of Washington
Some members of the netbook ultrasound team, with the system they built. Back row:
Beth Kolko, Waylon Brunette and Ruth Anderson. Front row: Alexis Hope, Pratik Prasad
and Wayne Gerard.
Undergraduates’ low-cost ultrasound system wins Gates
Foundation grant
Hannah Hickey
News and Information
University of Washington
The UW system uses a handheld ultrasound probe that connects via a USB port to a
touchscreen computer.
University of Washington
The team designed a simple interface specifically for midwives. Five slider bars adjust the
image settings. Four buttons control other functions, such as freezing the image or
accessing the main menu.
A team of University of Washington undergraduate students were among 65 research
groups that today learned they had won one of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation’s
$100,000 Grand Challenges Explorations grants.
This is the fifth round of Grand Challenges Explorations, an initiative to help scientists
around the world explore bold and largely unproven ways to improve health in
developing countries. To receive funding, applicants show in a two-page application how
their idea falls outside current scientific paradigms and might lead to significant
advances in global health.
Grantees, chosen from more than 2,400 proposals, represent 16 countries on five
continents.
“I am a huge believer in the creativity of undergraduates,” said faculty adviser Beth
Kolko, a UW professor of human centered design and engineering. “This grant really
validates that belief.”
The UW students and faculty are testing a low-cost ultrasound system this month on
pregnant women at the UW Medical Center and Harborview. They will use the grant to
travel to Africa to test their system in its ultimate capacity as a tool to increase access to
ultrasound and lower childbirth-related mortality, which kills an estimated 1,000 women
each day, almost entirely in the developing world.
The UW device consists of an ultrasound Interson probe that connects via a USB port to
a netbook with a touch-sensitive screen. It is designed to be cheap, portable, durable
and easy to use. The work builds upon previous work done by researchers at
Washington University in St. Louis.
Receiving the Gates Foundation grant “was very relieving,” said team member Wayne
Gerard, a senior in computer engineering. “We were not sure where we were going to
get funding to travel to Uganda. We’re also very honored to have such a great
foundation backing us, but mostly it is great to know that we have some funds to test
our device.”
Right now students estimate their whole system, including the free software, costs about
$3,500. The most expensive part is the roughly $3,000 ultrasound probe, which the
group has on loan from a UW anesthesiologist. Parts could be swapped out if cheaper
models become available.
“We’re relying on older technology,” said Alexis Hope, a master’s student in human
centered design and engineering. “With time, our system will naturally get cheaper.”
The effort began in the summer of 2009, when Dr. Rob Nathan, a UW assistant professor
of radiology, approached Kolko. Nathan was part of a pilot project testing portable
ultrasound in Uganda. He began wondering if it was the right approach.
“Portable ultrasound units currently available from manufacturers range from $15,000
to $60,000, far too expensive for ministries of health or donors to consider purchasing in
large numbers,” Nathan said. The devices were also too complex for most midwives to
use.
Last winter, Kolko’s Concepts in Human-Computer Interaction class teamed up with
computer science lecturer Ruth Anderson’s course, Designing Technologies for
Resource-Constrained Environments. Five students set out to design a low-cost maternal
ultrasound for use in the developing world.
“We got thrown into it after hearing a brief presentation by Dr. Nathan about what he
was looking for,” Hope said. “We sort of jumped at the challenge.”
At first students thoroughly researched the medical needs, the existing technology and
other groups’ attempts to deliver low-cost ultrasound. They spoke with their professors
and with ultrasound practitioners at the UW Medical Center. They also drew up a survey
for the Ugandan midwives working with Nathan.
Their eventual concept was a modular device with a simple interface and off-the-shelf
parts. It would focus on detecting three things: multiple births; breech births, when the
fetus’ head is pointing upward; and when the placenta is blocking the birth canal.
Midwives seeing these high-risk cases could advise the mother to deliver at a medical
center rather than at home.
Last spring, the concept became reality. The project evolved into a senior-level research
project in computer science and engineering working with Kolko’s team. Doctoral
student Waylon Brunette and professor Gaetano Borriello joined Anderson as advisers.
Initial funding came from a $2,500 undergraduate research award from the College of
Engineering.
“We came after this not just as a technology problem but as a human problem. We were
really able to innovate that way. And I think that’s been the missing piece in other low-
cost ultrasound projects,” Kolko said.
More graduate students in the human centered design and engineering department
have joined the group this fall, many using the project to earn research credits. This
month’s preliminary tests in Seattle will be the first time the device is used to image a
Facebook Twitter Email
fetus. The students also are writing a help system and preparing for the field test in
Uganda.
The group will present its research next month in London, England at the Symposium on
Computing for Development, which focuses on computing applications for the
developing world.
“This started as a class project,” Hope said. “To find out that we had gotten the money
was very exciting. It really drove home that this project is going to push forward.”
Other members of the core team are Matthew Hicks, a senior in informatics and
comparative history of ideas; Pratik Prasad, a junior in computer science and
mathematics; and Nicole Goldsmith, a clinical ultrasound instructor at UW radiology.
###
For more information, contact Kolko at 206-650-0120 or bkolko@uw.edu and Nathan at
206-769-3842 or ronathan@uw.edu (Nathan will be leaving town for 10 days on Friday,
Nov. 12). Contact Hope at 425-417-3453 or alexishg@uw.edu and Gerard at 206-491-
2399 or wayger@uw.edu.
More about the research is at http://change.washington.edu/projects/mobile-
midwives-ultrasound/.
Comments for this thread are now closed. ×
0 Comments UW News Login

Sort by Newest Share ⤤
Be the first to comment.
Subscribe
✉ Add Disqus to your site
d Privacy

Favorite ★
