Aims (Brief)
To design an ultra-low-cost medical ultrasound machine which is capable of being built, used, and
maintained by people in developing countries.
To make the design and manufacturing methods freely available to all people.
Index
The LOCUP Project has been retired as of 29th October 2000. Any interested parties who wish to
continue with the idea are encouraged to do so. The chief obstacles to the project have been:-
Transducer manufacture difficulty.
Other commitments by Tony Barry.
This page will be removed from the search engines (Yahoo, Altavista, etc) and you may remove your
bookmarks at your convenience.
Regards,
Tony Barry
LOCUP Project inception: October 1997. This page: inception 15th August 1998.
Major overhaul of interface 17th January 1999.
Latest update 29th October 2000.
New or changed items marked with
Aims (Brief)
Why do developing countries need a low-cost ultrasound?
Design (Overview)
Provisional Specifications
Minimum PC requirements
Design Criteria: Transducer
Design Criteria: Interface
Design Criteria: Software
Improvements which could be planned ...
Improvements which are not planned ...
Expected project timeline: Phase 1
Expected project timeline: Phase 2
Expected project timeline: Phase 3
Sourcing of Parts
Plea for help
Ultrasound Images Wanted!
About the authors ...
The Ultra-Low-Cost Ultrasound Project (LOCUP) http://traktoria.org/files/sonar/Ultra-Low-Cost_Ultrasound_Project_(...
1 sur 6 02/10/2014 10:55
Why do developing countries need a low-cost
ultrasound?
In Australia, medical ultrasounds are commonly available in health centres throughout the country. For a
very good, new, ultrasound, the health centre will pay around $250,000 dollars; for a second hand
machine, the prices start at around $20,000.
These machines will do almost all the medical procedures that are performed using ultrasound; they have
special probes for scanning the prostate, they can measure blood flow in veins and arteries, as well as the
more common imaging of pregnant women for pre-natal checkups. The images they produce are clear and
precise, and a far cry from the grainy, grey, difficult-to-interpret pictures of snowstorms that used to be
shown as "ultrasounds" ten years ago.
However, the situation in developing countries is not nearly so pleasant; even the second-hand ultrasound
costing Aus$20,000 probably exceeds the gross yearly budget for the average district hospital.
In these situations, local doctors turn to X-ray imaging - because they do not have an alternative. Film
costs are high, and radiation doses are often higher than in the West because the film has less active
ingredient (so it needs more radiation to make it show). But this is all they have. Real-time imaging
(ultrasound) is not available with the budget of the average district hospital.
Yet this need not be the case. Examination of the procedures that doctors use ultrasound for, reveals that
perhaps 85% of procedures could be performed using extrememly basic ultrasound machines ... machines
without the special probes and high-tech attachments that are characteristic of modern machines.
In essence, we are talking about an ultra low-cost ultrasound - a one-transducer machine, that uses a PC
to provide control and display abilities, and a mechanical action to provide the scanning (rather then the
more complex phased arrays used in new machines).
Such a machine will use all the computing power that is available today in low-cost personal computers, to
provide image enhancement that simply was not available fifteen years ago. This will make the ultrasound
easier to interpret. It will be slower, of course, doing 3 pictures a second real-time (stop-start freeze-
frame) rather than the 30 fps available on high-cost machines. But it will do most of the procedures
needed, it will save on film costs and X-ray radiation hazards, and most importantly, it will be available in
the local health centre and be usable and maintainable by local people.
Back to Index
Design (overview)
The machine will consist of a transducer (handpiece) and an interface board. It will use an
IBM-compatible computer (386 or better) to provide the display and controlling functions for the
ultrasound.
Provisional Specifications
The World Health Organisation has provided a "Specification for a general purpose ultrasound scanner" in
its document "The future use of new imaging technologies in developing countries" (WHO, 1985,
Technical Report Series)
The Ultra-Low-Cost Ultrasound Project aims to meet or exceed these specifications.
Back to Index
Minimum PC Requirements
The Ultra-Low-Cost Ultrasound Project (LOCUP) http://traktoria.org/files/sonar/Ultra-Low-Cost_Ultrasound_Project_(...
2 sur 6 02/10/2014 10:55
The PC used in the development of LOCUP will be a 386SX/33, with 4Mb RAM, VGA 640 x 480 with
1Mb video RAM, 10 Mb free space on the hard drive, and DOS 6.22 as the operating system.
Design Criteria
Transducer
Show section of transducer and holder
Transducers are difficult to produce by technicians in developing countries. Panametrics produces
non-destructive testing transducers which are suitable for the project.
However, there is the possibility that transducers can be gotten from "spark guns" of the type used to
ignite gas stoves and lanterns etc. They must be lapped or polished to produce the correct frequency
output, and must be tested during the lapping phase to ensure purity of output (i.e. no flaws in the
substrate). Damping the element must also be undertaken by the constructor. This is the current area of
investigation.
Preliminary design for the transducer mounting is to have a mechanical (oscillating) sweep in an oil bath.
The sweep motor is to be a standard floppy disk drive head stepper motor. Three sweeps per second are
presently envisageded.
Maximum ultrasound output power must conform to the relevant standard (less than 1000W/sq.m, or
about 9mW for a 3mm diameter transducer).
The transducer assembly will include a press-button to activate the scanner and an LED to indicate
scanning. Internally, the assembly will contain the transducer and oil bath, an air-bubble trap, an analog
preamp for the transducer, the stepper motor, and the motor drive electronics.
Show section of transducer asssembly
Show transducer rotor assembly
Show stepper motor drive detail
Show transducer assembly schematic diagram
Notes on transducer assembly
Back to Index
Interface
The interface for the ultrasound is presently being designed for the 8-bit PC ISA bus (8.33MHz, 62 pin).
The board is to use a Harris Semiconductor 8-bit A/D converter (HI 1175 JCP) which can provide at least
20 megasamples per second. This chip is a second-source pin compatible equivalent for the Sony
CXD1175 ADC.
On-board RAM is provided by using two Advanced Micro Devices AM7204A-35RC, 35nsec 4096 x 9 bit
CMOS FIFOs. This chip or its equivalents are sourced by several manufacturers.
Function
See the engineering notes for a detailed description of this process.
Construction of board The board will be double-sided only (no multi-layer boards), and use 2.54mm
spacing pinouts (0.1inch) on components (no surface mount devices) to make it easier for humans (rather
than wave-soldering machines) to assemble and service.
Show interface schematic
Show ISA interface schematic
Back to Index
The Ultra-Low-Cost Ultrasound Project (LOCUP) http://traktoria.org/files/sonar/Ultra-Low-Cost_Ultrasound_Project_(...
3 sur 6 02/10/2014 10:55
Software
The software is to be designed for the Intel 80386 or better processors (IBM PC - compatible computers),
and run under DOS 6.22.
The software will need to achieve four goals:-
run in a real-time minimal enhancement mode, where 3 frames per second are displayed on screen.
Show minimal enhanced ultrasound pic
run a maximum enhancement, position-stabilised mode side-by-side with the real-time image. In this
mode a separate view is also displayed, which is an average of the images in real-time mode. A
couple of markers are selected on the real-time image, and when their position is in the same
relative position as on the previous image, the data is averaged again, and rendered in
high-resolution and high contrast enhancement.
Show enhanced ultrasound pic (gammafixed)
Show enhanced ultrasound pic (gammafixed + sharpened)
Save the resultant image to disk, and annotate the image with text and elementary graphics (lines,
pointers, unfilled ellipses; all with auto-contrasting so they do not blend in to the image at any
point).
display a library of common ultrasound images with annotations, capable of being added to and
retrieved side-by-side with the current image.
print the image to bubble-jet, laser, and letter-quality dot-matrix printers using a half-tone driver to
simulate greyscale.
Show programming details for prototype board
Back to Index
Improvements which could be planned ...
The inclusion of electronic focussing would add considerably to the image quality. However, it requires
several times (2 to 8 times) the number of transducers. If an outsourced transducer is used (i.e. gotten
from Panametrics et al), then electronic focussing will not be an option due to the cost of the transducers.
However, if the constructors lap their own transducers, then electronic focussing will be required, due to
the small size of the elements available from spark guns etc. Eight transducers will need to be lapped, all
to the same centre frequency and damped to the same degree.
Doppler (velocity-sensing) would provide some additional medical usefulness, but it requires a higher
sample rate and cunning software to detect the frequency shift in the returned signal.
Back to Index
Improvements which are not planned ...
Phased array sweep, and linear arrays, would improve the mechanical robustness enormously, and remove
air-bubble artifacts, but would require many more times the number of transducers and A/D converters
Back to Index
Expected project timeline
Inception: October 1997 by Attila Danko and Tony Barry.
The Ultra-Low-Cost Ultrasound Project (LOCUP) http://traktoria.org/files/sonar/Ultra-Low-Cost_Ultrasound_Project_(...
4 sur 6 02/10/2014 10:55
Phase 1 target:
A single transducer, mechanical sweep ultrasound, conforming to electrical and medical safety
requirements. Real-time 3 sweeps/second. Software running minimal enhancement display. Save images to
disk.
Working prototype interface: August 1999
Working prototype transducer: August 1999
Operating prototype ultrasound: December 1999
Phase 2 target:
Software running enhanced images side-by-side with real-time image.
Phase 3 target:
Software library on-line, annotate and print images.
Software: ongoing.
Back to Index
Sourcing of Parts
The project's aim is to have the ultrasound constructed as far as is possible from parts that are easily
obtainable in unit lots in any third world country - and that's no mean feat.
Outsourced transducers can be gotten from Panametrics (branches in several countries). Their stock
number is A381S-SU, which is for an immersion transducer, centre freq 3.5MHz, diameter 19mm,
spherical focus at 150mm). Costs are high ... Aus$550
This is an unsolicited advertisement.
The interface board uses some components sourced from RS Components, a company with an unfortunate
name but a great warehouse, and reasonable prices on semis as well. They have branches in such places as
Argentina and India (as well as Australia). For details of their locations, prices, etc, email to:-
tech@rscomp.net.au
This is an unsolicited advertisement.
Current costs at August 1998:-
HI 1175 JCP 20MSPS A/D converter 24-pin DIP package - Aus$28.42
RS part No. 233-9120
AM 7204A-35RC 35nsec 4096 x 9 CMOS FIFO 28 pin DIP package - Aus$48.27
RS part No. 181-9603
MC 74HC688 8-bit Address decoder 20-pin DIP - Aus$2.34
RS part No. 643-607
TDA 8702/C2 8-bit DAC 30MHz 16-pin DIP - Aus$11.48
RS Part No. 810-065
The Ultra-Low-Cost Ultrasound Project (LOCUP) http://traktoria.org/files/sonar/Ultra-Low-Cost_Ultrasound_Project_(...
5 sur 6 02/10/2014 10:55
Plea for help
Any help that you can give to this project would be gratefully received.
Design and construction of transducers.
Design of preamps for transducer to interface.
Applications software.
The people who work on the project are all volunteers and contribute their time and expertise freely. The
aim is to produce the design and manufacturing notes for a medical ultrasound for as low a cost as
possible. Presently the development site is in Sydney, Australia, but people from other states or countries
are very welcome to join forces.
The originators of the project are aiming for a total cost of less than $US350 for the complete ultrasound.
This does not include the cost of the PC.
Copyright on source code (for example) may remain with the originator of the software, however it should
be "freeware" under the terms of the project. Hooks for future module insertion should be part of the
software, so that improvements do not necessarily require access to the complete source code and total
recompiles.
Back to Index
Ultrasound images wanted!
Traditionally, the operation of a medical ultrasound required a good deal of training under the aegis of an
experienced sonographer, in order to interpret the (often fuzzy, ambiguous) images presented on-screen.
Some help can be given without such training, by providing an on-line library of sonographs, with
annotations, for referral by the user of the low-cost ultrasound.
If you have any images suitable for inclusion in the on-line library (pix + copious notes, preferably digital,
but we can scan hard-copy) please contact us.
Tony Barry or Attila Danko
LOCUP
attila68@yahoo.com
tonybarry@yahoo.com
locup@accsoft.com.au
Back to Index
About the authors
Tony Barry is an electrician/engineer/biologist from Newcastle, N.S.W., Australia. He worked in the
Australian coal mining industry as a mine electrician and electronics technician, and spent from 1993 to
1996 in Madras, South India as a team member of a primary health care clinic/sewer cleaning team called
Vision 2000.
Attila Danko is an intern at a country hospital in Victoria, Australia. He spent a year (1996) with the
Vision 2000 team as the clinic medical manager, and has a firm goal of returning to the Third World after
the completion of his training.
Ogi Mitzev is the senior engineer at Optimal Networks in San Francisco. He originally hails from Bulgaria,
and is the man responsible for reducing the LOCUP interface chip count by two-thirds.
Back to Index
The Ultra-Low-Cost Ultrasound Project (LOCUP) http://traktoria.org/files/sonar/Ultra-Low-Cost_Ultrasound_Project_(...
6 sur 6 02/10/2014 10:55
