Glasgow Theses Service
http://theses.gla.ac.uk/
theses@gla.ac.uk
Nicholson, Deborah (2003) Secrets of success:the development of
obstetric ultrasound in Scotland, 1963-1990. PhD thesis
http://theses.gla.ac.uk/3400/
Copyright and moral rights for this thesis are retained by the author
A copy can be downloaded for personal non-commercial research or
study, without prior permission or charge
This thesis cannot be reproduced or quoted extensively from without first
obtaining permission in writing from the Author
The content must not be changed in any way or sold commercially in any
format or medium without the formal permission of the Author
When referring to this work, full bibliographic details including the
author, title, awarding institution and date of the thesis must be given
Secrets of success: the development of obstetric
ultrasound in Scotland, 1963-1990
Deborah Nicholson
Thesis submitted to the University of Glasgow in patiial fulfilment ofthe
requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
(January 2003)
Abstract
This thesis examines the diffusion of obstetric ultrasound technology in Scotland, from the
early 1960s through to the end of the 1980s. Although the origins of obstetric ultrasound
can be traced to 1955, and the pioneering work undertaken by Professor Ian Donald and his
colleagues in Glasgow on the gynaecological applications of ultrasound, it was not until the
early 1960s that the pathologies associated with pregnancy were directly investigated. Over
the next thirty years, the technology underwent a number of significant transformations - in
technical design, application and use, and organisation. The main focus of this thesis is on
the uptake and implementation of obstetric ultrasound in new locations across Scotland, and
on the dynamics of change associated with its use in clinical practice.
Using a case-study approach which centres on four individual Scottish hospitals, this thesis
traces the complexity and heterogeneity evident in the diffusion of this technology. The
definition of 'technology' employed in this thesis is three-dimensional - comprising of
technical, cognitive and interactive/performative dimensions. Here it is argued that all three
of these dimensions compose a technology, and that all three are open to adaptation and
change, thus essentially changing the nature of the technology itself. This is highlighted
through a comparative account, focussing on site-specific differences in the development,
organisation and use of the technology.
The evidence presented here has been drawn from a variety of historical sources. The
recollections of a number of actors involved in the introduction, use and development of
obstetric ultrasound in Scotland, as well as of women who experienced ultrasound during
their pregnancies, have been collected using semi-structured interviews. To this oral history
has been added information from a variety of archival sources held at the British Medical
Ultrasound Society's Historical Collection (housed at The Queen Mother's Hospital,
Glasgow). These include specialist professional journals, correspondence relating to
ultrasound, manufacturers' literature, draft versions of key published papers, transcripts of
interviews with prominent actors in the field and material donated by ultrasound workers
across Scotland. Furthermore, the Collection also boasts a wide array of visual information
(including pictures of various types of ultrasound equipment and images generated from
them) and artifacts (ultrasound machines dating from the 1950s through to the 1980s).
These, less conventional, historical sources are also employed in this thesis.
In this comparative study of the diffusion of ultrasound, three related arguments are
presented. Firstly, it is argued that innovation and diffusion are not mutually exclusive
terms or periodising concepts, but are interwoven processes and forms of activity. The
diffusion of obstetric ultrasound did not signal the 'end' of innovation, but merely the point
at which new actors in new locations undertook it. Innovation is a crucial component in
adapting a technology to new circumstances, users or contexts and thus it is argued that
innovation and diffusion are inter-related, mutually dependent forms of interested human
action.
Secondly, obstetric ultrasound is characterised in this thesis as an emergent phenomenon,
shaped by both technical and social factors. When the development of this technology is
examined in a variety of historical and spatial contexts, it is evident that the form it takes is
determined by the interplay of social factors (professional relationships and interests, actors
interpretations of technology, etc.) and more technical or material factors (the way a
machine responds to new demands or itself requires certain types of human or social
response). Thus a complete account ofthe diffusion of obstetric ultrasound necessitates an
approach that considers both social and material influences on technological change.
Finally, this thesis explores the significance of site-specific local arrangements for the
shaping of obstetric ultrasound. Interactions with technology take place within specific
historical and locational settings. The specific character of each setting can affect the nature
of inter-professional relationships, the organisation and administration of the technology,
the characteristics of the patient population, and so on. Thus, the diffusion of obstetric
ultrasound and the form that it takes in each new location are partly shaped by the way in
which the technology interacts with new environments.
11
Acknowledgements
I am deeply indebted to my supervisors Dr Malcolm Nicolson and Professor Ray Stokes.
Without their guidance, patient support and encouragement this thesis may never have been
completed. Furthermore, their experience and knowledge of their respective fields helped to
shape my ideas into some form of coherence. For this, I will be indebted to them long after
this thesis begins to gather dust in Glasgow University Library. With one supervisor steeped
in sociology of science and medical history, and the other in history of technology, the
emergent product is a true hybrid.
The progression ofthis thesis has also been greatly aided by the material accumulated by
Malcolm Nicolson and John Fleming (along with Ian Spencer) on the history of diagnostic
ultrasound. Their project has been an invaluable source of information for me and provided
me with material which I would otherwise have been unable to access within the confines of
PhD research. I am extremely grateful to Malcolm for making this material available to me.
I also owe a great deal to Mr. John Fleming, former colleague of Professor Ian Donald and
curator ofthe British Medical Ultrasound Society's Historical Collection at The Queen
Mother's Hospital in Glasgow. Not only did John provide a wealth of archival material and
know instinctively where I might find the information I needed, but he has also been an
invaluable font of knowledge in his own right. As well as providing me with lists of
potential interviewees from his contacts in the field past and present, John patiently (and
repeatedly) explained to me the physics and engineering aspects of ultrasound. Pointing out
the key components of the machines in the collection, drawing diagrams and continuously
simplifying the complex expert knowledge of physics into the required 'ultrasound for
idiots' guide, John enabled a technologically illiterate historian to come to terms with the
complicated world of diagnostic ultrasound. Any remaining inaccuracies are therefore mine
alone.
Dr Margaret McNay, former consultant obstetrician at the Queen Mother's Hospital, was
also an invaluable source of information, providing contacts and explaining the nature and
significance of obstetric pathologies. I am also extremely indebted to all those involved with
the development and use of ultrasound in Scotland who gave up their time to speak to me,
and to the women who were prepared to share their ultrasound experiences. Without their
co-operation, this thesis would not have been possible.
III
I would also like to thank my former and current colleagues in the Centre for the History of
Medicine who helped sustain a research community which was both supportive and
divergent in ideas. I would particularly like to mention Ian Spencer, James Bradley, Andrew
Hull, Gayle Davis, Rosemary Elliot, Anne Cameron, Krista Maglen, Jenny Cronin and
Lindsay Reid. Particular gratitude goes to Matt Egan and Catriona Macdonald, for their
intellectual and personal support and encouragement. I am also grateful to Marguerite
Dupree and Anne Crowther for their guidance, and to Ann Mulholland and Rae McBain for
their support and good humour.
To my colleagues at the University of Paisley (especially Kathryn Burnett, Ian Watt, Renee
Bleau, Charlie Johnston, Hugh Maguinness, Ian Weddle, Kate Thomson and Kathleen
Ward) I also owe a debt of gratitude. In particular, however, I wish to thank Gwyneth Nair.
She was my 'Miss Jean Brodie', providing me with support and encouragement during my
undergraduate years, fostering my interest in history and introducing me to the history of
medicine. Without her influence this thesis would never have been conceived, and without
her support since my return to Paisley as a staff member, it may never have been completed.
Nevertheless, research communities are rarely geographically located and I received a great
deal of encouragement from the following: Steve Sturdy and Mike Barfoot at the University
of Edinburgh, David Smith and Bill Naphy at the University of Aberdeen and my history of
medicine PhD contemporaries in London, Oxford, Norwich and Manchester. I am also
greatly indebted to Andrew Pickering whose work radically transformed my view of
technology and science and whose encouraging feedback on an earlier version of some of
this material was an invaluable source of confidence.
Finally, but no less centrally, I wish to extend my heartfelt thanks to my parents.
Throughout the trials and tribulations associated with the construction of this thesis they
have been my rock and my refuge and to them I dedicate this work.
This research was financially supported by a Wellcome Trust Studentship, and by a William
and Sheila Glen Award from The University of Glasgow and I wish to acknowledge my
gratitude to both.
IV
Table ofcontents
Introduction: setting the scene(s)
Introduction
Understanding ultrasound
Themes
Methodology, or the 'heterogeneous engineering' of the historian
Organisation of the thesis
Chapter 1
(p.l)
(p.2)
(p.6)
(p.8)
(p.20)
(p.25)
Heterogeneous engineering: from metal flaws to female bodies - the emergence of
medical ultrasound in Glasgow (p. 28)
Introduction (p. 29)
Creating a 'working' medical machine
One group, two projects
The automatic scanner and the Sunden machine
Conclusions
Chapter 2
'Enrolment': the early career of contact B-scanning in Scotland
Introduction
The commercial suppliers: another change in ownership
Research into obstetric applications in Glasgow
Introducing a new obstetric technology in Aberdeen
The further diffusion of ultrasound in the early 1970s
Conclusions
Chapter 3
Motion in 'the mangle': contextualising choice and technological change
Introduction
Theorising competing technologies and 'consumer choice'
Competing modalities of moving images
(p.37)
(p.43)
(p.58)
(p. 66)
(p.69)
(p.70)
(p.76)
(p.79)
(p.92)
(p. 110)
(p. 117)
(p.122)
(p. 123)
(p. 126)
(p. 133)
v
First impressions in practice: using real-time ultrasound at The Queen Mother's and
Aberdeen Maternity Hospital (p. 147)
Portability in the periphery: the emergence of a valued 'quality'
in The Western Isles
The problem of delegation: techno-social relations in the context of
medical hierarchy
Conclusions
Chapter 4
(p. 165)
(p. 179)
(p. 190)
Regulating the routine? Stabilisation, standardisation and heterogeneity in the routine
use of ultrasound
Introduction
Universal screening with ultrasound in Scotland: some key characteristics
The safety debate
Standardisation or harmonisation? Regulating routine ultrasound
Conclusions
Coda
Scan stories: pregnant women's experiences of obstetric ultrasound
Introduction
The women and their pregnancies
The scan
Interacting with images
Conclusions
Conclusions: secrets of success
Introduction
Research themes revisited
Final conclusions: the 'secrets' of success
Appendices
Bibliography
(p.195)
(p. 196)
(p.202)
(p.222)
(p.229)
(p.240)
(p.244)
(p.245)
(p.248)
(p.254)
(p.259)
(p.270)
(p.272)
(p.273)
(p.277)
(p.282)
(p.285)
(p.288)
VI
Illustrations and Appendices
Figure 1.1 Mr Thomas Brown with the prototype 'bed table' scanner circa 1958.
Photograph courtesy of the BMUS Historical Collection. (p. 52)
Figure 1.2 Representation of the process of building an image with the compound
sector ultrasound scanner built by Brown. Photograph courtesy of the BMUS
Historical Collection. (p. 53)
Figure 1.3 Professor Ian Donald and Dr. John MacVicar using the automatic
scanner. Photograph courtesy ofthe BMUS Historical Collection. (p. 60)
Figure 1.4 The Sunden machine.
Photograph courtesy of the BMUS Historical Collection. (p. 64)
Figure 3.1 An early M-Mode display.
Taken from Woo, J., 'A short history of ultrasound in obstetrics and
gynaecology, part 2' www.ob-ultrasound.net/history. (p. 135)
Figure 3.2 Born's original linear array transducer.
Taken from Woo. J., 'A short history of ultrasound' (p. 138)
Figure 3.3 The Diagnostic Sonar 'System 85'.
Photograph courtesy of Blackwell, R.I., (1980), 'The basic physical principles
ofreal-time ultrasound scanning' in Bennett, M.J., & Campbell, S., (eds.), Real-
time ultrasound in obstetrics, Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, London
& Edinburgh, p. 3. (p. 140)
Figure 3.4 A fetal head, imaged by a Diagnostic Sonar 'System 85'.
Photograph courtesy of Blackwell, R.I., (1980), 'The basic physical principles of
ultrasound', p. 3. (p. 140)
Figure 3.5 A diagram representing the operation of the EMI 'Spinner'
From Blackwell, R.J., (1980), 'The basic physical principles of ultrasound'
p.23.
Figure 3.6 Image of fetal head created by EMI 'Spinner'.
From Blackwell, R.I., (1980) 'The basic physical principles of ultrasound'
p.23.
Figure 3.7 Diagram representing the operation of the Siemens Vidoson.
From McDicken, W.N., (1976), Diagnostic ultrasonics, principles and use
ofinstruments, Crosby Lockwood Staples, London, p. 210.
Figure 3.8 Fetal face and head, imaged using a Siemens Vidoson.
From Woo J, 'A short history of ultrasound, part 2'.
Figure 3.9 Diagnostic Sonar advertisement literature circa 1979.
Comiesy of BMUS Historical Collection.
(p. 143)
(p. 143)
(p. 144)
(p. 144)
(p. 171)
Vll
Figure 3.10 Pie Data 400 used in the Western Isles. Photographed in Castlebay,
Barra, by the author. (p. 175)
Figure 3.11 One of the detachable monitors used with Pie Data machine in the
Western Isles. Photographed in Ness, Isle of Lewis, by the author. (p. 176)
Figure 3.12 Custom-made steel protective case, used to transport Pie Data
machine. Photographed in Castlebay, Barra, by the author. (p. 177)
Figure 4.1 Number of antenatal scanning sessions performed by different groups of
workers in Scotland and the South East Thames region. From RCOG, (1984), 'Routine
ultrasound examination in pregnancy' p. 26. (p.217)
Appendices
Appendix 1 'Three levels of obstetric ultrasound' from Scottish Home and
Health Department/Scottish Health Service Planning Council, 'Obstetric Ultrasound
in Scotland: Report ofthe Ad Hoc Group appointed by the Specialty sub-committee
for Obstetrics and Gynaecology of the National Medical Consultative Committee'
Her Majesty's Stationary Office, Edinburgh, 1988. (p.285)
Appendix 2 Aberdeen Maternity Hospital scan information leaflet, 'Information
for parents: the 20 week (detailed) scan' Scanning Department, August 1997. (p.286)
V111
Introduction: setting the scene(s)
Introduction
In 1963, Ian Donald (Regius Professor of Midwifery at Glasgow University) was presented
with the world's first commercially produced obstetric ultrasound scanner - a
'Diasonograph' made in Scotland by Smiths Industries. The new machine was delivered to
the Queen Mother's Maternity Hospital at Yorkhill in Glasgow, although the hospital itself
was not officially opened for service until 1964. For Donald and those who worked with
him, this piece of equipment marked the culmination of eight years of research into the
clinical potential of ultrasound as a diagnostic tool in both gynaecology and obstetrics.
However, in many ways, the production of the machine itself is where the story of the
development of obstetric ultrasound really begins, rather than ends.
Over the course ofthe following thirty years, ultrasound would emerge as one of the most
successful diagnostic technologies in medicine - both in terms of its widespread use across
the world, and in terms of the number of clinical specialties that would incorporate
ultrasound imaging as part of their diagnostic armoury. However, of all the medical uses to
which ultrasound has been put, its closest and most well-known association has been with
the specialty of obstetrics. Throughout the history of the use of ultrasound within obstetrics,
the number of clinical conditions and pathologies that it could help diagnose has
proliferated - making it one of the most commonly used technologies within the specialty.
Indeed, it is possible to argue that ultrasound scans became an integral part ofthe very
experience ofpregnancy in the late twentieth century. By the end of the 1980s, 87% of
pregnant women in Scotland would experience an ultrasound scan at least once during the
course of their pregnancyi, and for many a scan was something to be looked forward to with
anticipation as the first opportunity to 'see' their unborn babies. In fact, it is now common
for ultrasound scan images to be placed in baby albums as 'baby's first picture'. But how
did this happen? What lies behind the success of this procedure? What processes and
actions have led to its accepted and central role in hospital-based antenatal care? Or, to
borrow from Casper and Clarke's terminology, how did it become the 'right tool for the
I Scottish Home and Health Department/Scottish Health Services Planning Council, (1986), 'Obstetric
ultrasound in Scotland: report ofthe ad hoc group appointed by the specialty sub-committee for obstetrics and
gynaecology of the National Medical Consultative Committee' Her Majesty's Stationary Office, Edinburgh, p.
16.
2
job,?2 To answer these questions attention has to be directed at the way in which this
technology became embedded in the medical sphere and, indeed, at the way in which both
technology and context were adapted and altered so that they 'fit' one another.
From the moment of its initial innovation, the history of obstetric ultrasound can be viewed
as a multi-layered phenomenon. First of all, it was played out in a number of arenas - in the
research and development laboratories of the various companies who were interested in its
commercial production, in the board and committee rooms of funding bodies, university
departments and laboratories, private Trust Funds, government planning departments,
professional bodies and hospital managers, and in the clinic. Furthermore, these different
arenas operated at different levels of abstraction from the point of actual practice. For
example, government advisory bodies were involved in the planning and regulation of
ultrasound at a national (both Scottish and UK) level whereas those operating in other
arenas, such as obstetricians or radiographers using ultrasound within the clinic, interacted
with the technology at a more local level. However, each of these different arenas impacted
upon one another, and thus the activities enacted in one type of arena would affect others,
thus mutually helping to shape the emerging technology. Furthermore, the boundaries
between arenas were fluid. For example, clinicians who used the technology in the hospital
might also sit on government advisory committees, while prototype machines might be
loaned to hospitals to be assessed by operating staff. In order to observe how these
relationships were played out in practice (without being subsumed beneath a complicated
and ever-shifting narrative) this thesis will concentrate on the development of obstetric
ultrasound from within the context of the clinic and thus activities occurring at other levels
will be examined in terms of their effects on ultrasound in clinical practice.
For the purposes of this thesis, 'the clinic' is defined in very broad terms to encompass all
events that take place in the realm of actual medical practice. In other words, the thesis will
concentrate on changes that occurred while the technology was being used as a clinical
diagnostic tool in hospitals and surgeries across Scotland. The exception to this is Chapter
1, which looks at the early activities of ultrasound workers in Glasgow where the technology
2 Casper, MJ. & Clarke, A.E., (1998), 'Making the Pap Smear into the "right tool" for the job: cervical cancer
screening in the USA circa 1940-95' Social studies ofscience, Vol. 28, No.2, pp. 255-90.
3
was first developed. Thus Chapter 1 lays out the background to ultrasound, and introduces it
as a new imaging modality in medicine. Nevertheless, even at this early point in its
development, ultrasound was essentially a clinical innovation, with much of the early work
being carried out at the Western Infirmary where modified industrial flaw detecting
equipment was used on the hospital's gynaecology patients.
Through focusing on the clinic, it should be possible to uncover the nature ofthe
relationships between ultrasonic waves, medical personnel, pregnant women, hospital
administrations, medical hierarchies and institutions. To this end, the thesis will consider the
diffusion of obstetric ultrasound in Scotland - looking at the way in which the technology
spread out from its origin and early use in Glasgow and at the way in which it was used and
received in different locations throughout Scotland. Using a comparative approach, it will
analyse the development of obstetric ultrasound in what Andrew Pickering refers to as 'real-
time' - developments as they happened in situ and in the realm ofpractice.3
In other words,
this narrative will focus on new practices and techniques as they emerged, and will examine
how they were perceived through a consideration of contemporary publications and the
recollections of the actors involved. In this way, the meaning of ultrasound practices will not
be imposed on its historical development retrospectively in light of the way in which the
technology is currently perceived.
Analysing ultrasound within its clinical environment has two very important implications
for the approach to be taken. First of all, it requires a focus on the practice of obstetric
ultrasound. This means, therefore, that the narrative has to search beyond a simplistic
definition of ultrasound which regards it merely as a technical artifact. Instead, it is perhaps
more useful to consider ultrasound as a socio-technical activity - with both the technical and
3 Pickering, A., (1995), The mangle ofpractice: time agency and science, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago and London; idem, (1995), 'Cyborg history and the World War II regime' Perspectives on science,
Vol. 3, No.1, pp. 1-48.
4
the social being represented and accounted for in the telling of its history.4 Secondly,
focusing on developments within the clinic entails that this must be a study of diffusion and
development - of the extension of medical culture via the concrete day-to-day problem
solving and practice of organising and operating obstetric ultrasound.s To borrow from
Pickering's phraseology once more, ultrasound in each location needs to be viewed as an
emergent practice
6
rooted in the particularities ofits daily use and implementation in each
site. In essence, therefore, this study is a contextualised account oftechnological
development, which comparatively examines the technology's'career' in a number of
locations.
Using a case-study approach based on individual hospitals this thesis will map out the
various ways in which obstetric ultrasound was introduced and utilised in Scotland. Indeed
Scotland as a whole provides a good micro study of the various elements that can effect, and
be affected by, a new medical technology such as ultrasound. Despite being a relatively
small country, Scotland is notable for the variety of its social geography. As well as the
large, urban industrial centres located mainly in the central belt, Scotland is also
characterised by sparsely populated regions and small, relatively isolated, island
communities. This in turn leads to diversity in terms of, for example, communication links,
4 Similar approaches to technology can be found in the following excellent collected volumes; Bijker, W.E.,
Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, TJ., (eds.), (1987), The social construction o/technological systems, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass.; Bijker, W.E. & Law, J., (eds.), (1992), Shaping technology/building society: studies in
sociotechnical change, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.; MacKenzie, D. & Wajcman, J., (eds.), (1985), The
social shaping o/technology: how the reji'igerator got its hum, Open UP, Milton Keynes. See also Bijker,
W.E., (1995), 0/bicycles, bakelites, and bulbs: towards a theOlY 0/sociotechnical change, MIT Press,
London; Howell, J.D., (1995), Technology in the hospital: transforming patient care in the early hventieth
centwy, John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore & London; Hughes, T.P., (1983), Networks o/power:
electrification in western society, 1880-1930, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore & London; Law, J.,
(ed.), (1991), A sociology o/monsters: essays on power, technology and domination, Routledge, London;
Lawrence, G., (ed.), (1994), Technologies o/modern medicine, Science Museum, London; MacKenzie, D.,
(1996), Knowing machines: essays on technical change, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass. & London; idem,
(1993), Inventing accuracy: a historical sociology o/nuclear missile guidance, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
& London; Pasveer, B., (1992), 'Shadows of knowledge, making a representing practice in medicine: x-ray
pictures and pulmonary tuberculosis, 1895-1930' PhD Thesis (University of Amsterdam), published by CIP-
Gegevens Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Den Haag; idem, (1990), 'Knowledge of shadows: the introduction ofx-ray
images in medicine,' Sociology 0/health and illness, Vol. 11, No.4, pp. 360-81; Pickering, A., (1995), The
mangle o/practice; Pickstone, J.V., (ed.), (1992), Medical innovations in historical perspective, St. Martins
Press, New York.
5 For comparable studies of diffusion see Bijker, W.E., (1995), Bicycles, bakelites and bulbs; Casper, M.J. &
Clarke, A.E., (1998), 'Making the Pap Smear'; Clarke, A.E. & Fujimura, 1.H., (eds.), (1992), The right tools
/01' the job: at work in hventieth centllly life sciences, Princeton University Press, Princeton N.J.; Howell, J.D.,
(1995), Technology in the hospital; Hughes, T.P., (1983), Nenvorks o/power; Pickstone, lV., (ed.), (1992),
Medical innovations.
5
social and technical infrastructure and, in particular for the purposes of this thesis, medical
services. Thus examining ultrasound in a variety of such settings and locations will uncover
the sheer number of site-specific (and often unpredictable) factors that can influence
development. For this reason, it provides an ideal location for constructing a micro study of
the multiple ways in which a technology can be developed.
Understanding ultrasound
What is obstetric ultrasound? There are several ways of approaching this basic question.
The first and, one might expect, the easiest, is to attempt to explain what the technology
actually does, by emphasising what physical properties it employs and for what purpose. In
essence, obstetric ultrasound machines use pulses of high frequency, inaudible sound to
detect hidden structures in utero. In very simplistic terms, a transducer emits sound waves at
a fixed frequency, which travel into the body.7 There they are absorbed, transmitted or
reflected (according to the physical make-up ofthe structures which they 'hit') and the
resultant echoes are picked up and converted into some form of visual format. Nevertheless,
even such a limited definition ofultrasound imaging is problematic. There are a number of
ways in which the sound waves can be produced, transmitted and received and obstetric
ultrasound itself has undergone many developments in transducer design and operation, and
image display systems. Thus, the very nature of what obstetric ultrasound is and how it
works has to be viewed as a complex and historically contingent phenomenon, which has
emerged over time and as a result of continuous development and innovation.
Furthermore, obstetric ultrasound is about much more than the physics of ultrasonic waves,
or the nuts and bolts of ultrasound equipment. Ultrasound is a technology and therefore, by
definition, it is also a socially defined activity. That is to say, ultrasound is about more than
simply the equipment itself - it forms a particular social activity, performed in a specific set
(, Pickering, A., (1995), The mangle o/practice.
7 For a basic understanding of the physical principles of this technology there are numerous guides for medics,
physicists and laymen. See, for example, Hobbins, J.C., Winsberg, F. & Berkowitz, R.L., (1983),
Ultrasonography in obstetrics and gynaecology (2nd edition), Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, chapter 1;
McDicken, W.N., (1976), Diagnostic ultrasonics, principles and use 0/instruments, Crosby Lockwood
Staples, London; Wolbarst, A.B., (1999), Looking within: how x-ray, CT, MRI, ultrasound, and other medical
images are created and how they help physicians save lives, University of California Press, London.
6
of social circumstances.8
Therefore, the social dimensions of ultrasound must be analysed
as both a part of the technology itself and as contributory factors in its development and
diffusion. In other words, users themselves help to shape technology and they do so within
specific social contexts. A company may make many ultrasound machines but unless there
are personnel who are trained to use them, funds with which to buy them, pregnant women
on which to use them and space in which to place them, they will not be utilised. Thus, to
study the diffusion of obstetric ultrasound is to consider all of these dimensions and the way
in which they are arrayed in different times and places - hence the advantage of a
comparative approach.
But in what way should the social and the technical be viewed - what is the relationship
between the two? In a sense, this is one of the main research questions to which this thesis
is addressed. To examine the relationship between the social and technical elements of
ultrasound, to uncover the way in which they impinge on one another and shape the
development and diffusion of this technology, is to uncover the secrets of its success.
Herein, however, lies the problem: there exists a vast array of theoretical approaches into
which a history of obstetric ultrasound could be placed. This is a technology that overlaps
many current concerns in historical studies and the social sciences. As a medical practice
developed mainly by men and applied exclusively to women it falls into the area of concern
of women's studies and gender history.9 As an expensive and intricate medical technology
8 See MacKenzie, D. & Wajcman, 1., (eds.), (1985), The social shaping oftechnology, (especially the
introductory chapter) for a three-strand definition of 'technology'.
9 See, for example, DUden, B., (1993), Disembodying women: perspectives on pregnancy and the unborn,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass. & London; Ehrenreich, B. & English, D., (1979), For her own
good: 150 years ofthe expert's advice to women, Pluto Press, London; Evans, F., (1985), 'Managers and
labourers: women's attitudes to reproductive technologies' in Faulkner, W. & Arnold, E., (eds.), Smothered by
invention, Pluto Press, London; Greig, R., (1995), Pregnancy in a high-tech age - paradoxes ofchoice, New
York UP, New York; Inch, S., (1982), Birthrights: a parent's guide to modern childbirth, Hutchinson & Co.,
London; Oakley, A., (1987), 'From walking wombs to test-tube babies' in Stanworth, M., (ed.), Reproductive
technologies: gender, motherhood & medicine, Polity Press, Cambridge; idem., (1984), The captured womb: a
histOfY ofthe medical care ofpregnant women, Blackwell, Oxford; Petchesky, R., (1987), 'Fetal images: the
power of visual culture and the politics of reproduction' Feminist Studies, Vol. 2, No.2, pp. 263-93; Rapp, R.,
(2000), Testing women, testing the fetus: the social impact ofamniocentesis in America, Routledge, New York
& London; idem., (1997), 'Real-time fetus: the role of the sonogram in the age of monitored reproduction' in
Downey, G.L. & Dumit, J., (eds.), Cyborgs and citadels, School of American Research Press, Santa Fe, New
Mexico; Rowland, R., (1992), Living laboratories: women and reproductive technologies, Lime Tree,
London; Stanworth, M., (ed.), (1987), Reproductive technologies: gender, motherhood & medicine, Polity
Press, Cambridge.
7
of the late twentieth century, it could also be regarded as a central component of high
technology medicine - part of an era in which technology appears to reign supreme in
medical practice.10 Thus depending on the type of account one might want to write, there are
various ways to conceptualise and make sense of the development of this technology. Or, to
put this another way, the history of obstetric ultrasound could be constructed to fit a number
of grand narratives: narratives about 'Progress' and the technical superiority of the late 20th
century, or about the medicalisation of the pregnant body by a profession dominated by
men, or about medicine's increasing reliance (or dependency) on technology. However, in
the construction of this particular history of ultrasound, a conscious attempt has been made
to investigate and challenge the usefulness of such grand narratives. From the outset, the
development of obstetric ultrasound was characterised by an unpredictability and
heterogeneity which entail that it would not readily fit into any grand narrative without a
high degree of simplification and abridgement. For this reason, this thesis will argue (as
others have done elsewhere and in different contexts) that heterogeneity, diversity and
unpredictability should be embraced in accounts oftechnological development, rather than
glossed over.II
Themes
In this thesis, three specific (although inter-related) arguments will be presented. The first of
these relates to the nature of the relationship between what are traditionally regarded as
'innovation' and 'diffusion'.
According to the Oxford English Dictionmy, to 'imlovate' is to 'bring in something new' or
to 'make changes in something established'.12 To diffuse, on the other hand, is to 'pour or
send forth as from a center of dispersion' or to 'spread widely, shed abroad, disperse,
10 Reiser, S.J., (1978), Medicine and the reign oftechnology, Cambridge UP, Cambridge; Jennett, B., (I986),
High technology medicine: benefits and burdens, Oxford UP, Oxford.
II Latour, B., (1992), 'Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few mundane artifacts', in Bijker,
W.E. & Law, J., (eds.), Shaping technology/building society, pp. 225-58; idem, (1987), Science in action,
Harvard UP, Cambridge, Mass.; Law, 1., (ed.), A sociology ofmonsters: essays on power, technology and
domination, Routledge, London; Pickering, A., (1995), The mangle ofpractice; idem, (1995), 'Cyborg
history'; idem, 'Practice and posthumanism: social theory and a history of agency' (unpublished paper); idem,
'The objects of the humanities and the time of the cyborg' (unpublished paper).
12 The Shorter Oxford English dictionmy on historical principles, Volume I (1973 edition), Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
8
disseminate' .13 Within technology studies, innovation has thus been used to refer to the
invention and development of prototypes, while diffusion has been related to the wider
uptake of such novel devices and practices. For this reason, traditional accounts of
technological change tended to view the relationship between innovation and diffusion as
unproblematic, with the latter following logically and chronologically from the former.
This is particularly true of attempts to construct generalised models of technological
development, within which diffusion is often characterised as the 'final stage' of a general
development process. John McKinlay, for example, proposes a seven-stage model of the
'career' of a medical innovation.14 While, for McKinlay, the 'diffusion' stage is not the final
one (the technology may subsequently go through stages of discreditation and rejection as a
result of randomised controlled trials), his main thesis is that it should be. Randomised
controlled trials (the 'Holy Grail' of scientific medicine) should be carried out, according to
McKinlay, before diffusion occurs so that only'good' technologies will make it into
medical practice. Thus, for McKinlay, if the technology is properly (i.e. scientifically)
investigated while still an 'innovation' it will succeed and be adopted in other centres. In a
similar vein, H David Banta in his analysis of the diffusion of computed tomography (CT)
scanning in the United States, traces the factors which effected the adoption of this
technology in American hospitals. IS For Banta, however, the research agenda appears to be
related to identifying factors which might have prevented or constrained diffusion in certain
centres or types of institution. Thus the implicit suggestion is that if such constraints were
removed or avoided, the diffusion of CT would flow naturally and logically from
innovation.
More recent approaches to technological development have attempted to problematise the
relationship between innovation and diffusion by examining the dynamic nature ofthe
\3 ibid.
14 McKinlay, 1.B., (1981), 'From "promising report" to "standard procedure": seven stages in the career ofa
medical innovation' Mil/bank memorialfund quarterly, Vo!' 59, No.3, pp. 374 - 411.
15 Banta, H.D., (1980), 'The diffusion of the computed tomography (CT) scanner in the United States'
International Journal ofHealth Services, Vo!' 10, No.2, pp. 251-69.
9
latter. Thomas Hughes' technological systems approach, for example, has been widely
influential since the early 1980s.16
Hughes' approach highlights the various ways in which
key actors draw large systems together in order to secure the success of an innovation. Thus,
Hughes' 'engineer-entrepreneurs' perform a variety of roles and switch easily between fields
as diverse as politics, management, commerce, finance and technical engineering to create
their systems. In other words, a good innovation is not enough: technological innovations
rarely stand alone, but are instead encompassed within a wider network or system. The
creation of such systems involves considerable effort and activity in the process normally
labelled as 'diffusion'.
Another recent perspective is the social construction of technology (SCOT) approach of
Pinch and Bijker.17 In an attempt to close the gap developing between science studies and
technology studies in the early 1980s, Pinch and Bijker adapted some ofthe key concepts
used in the sociology of scientific knowledge (SSK) to provide a theoretical framework for
the study of technology. 18 In their account the 'interpretative flexibility' of technical
artifacts (or an artifact's ability to 'mean' different things to different groups of social
actors) entails that the content and design of a technology only becomes stabilised once a
certain meaning or interpretation becomes dominant. Thus diffusion creates the opportunity
for the proliferation of possible meanings, as the technology is increasingly used by a wider
variety of actors (or 'relevant social groups' which are Pinch and Bijker's main units of
analysis).
16 Hughes, T.P., (1987), 'The evolution of large technological systems' in Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch,
T., (eds.), The social construction o/technological systems, pp. 51-82; idem, (1983), Networks 0/power; idem,
(1979), 'The electrification of America: the systems builders' Technology & culture, Vol. 20, pp. 124-161.
17 Bijker, W.E., (1995), O/bicycles, bakelites, and bulbs; Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, T. (eds.),
(1987), Social construction a/technological systems; Bijker, W.E. & Law, J., (eds.), (1992), Shaping
technology/building society; Pinch T. & Bijker, W., (1986), 'Science, technology and the new sociology of
technology: reply to Russell' Social studies 0/science, Vol. 16, pp. 347-60; idem, (1984), 'The social
construction of facts and artifacts; or how the sociology of science and the sociology of technology might
benefit each other' Social studies a/science, Vol. 14, pp. 399-441.
18 In particular, Pinch and Bijker translated concepts from David Bloor's Strong Programme to technology
studies. For the main tenets of the Strong Programme see Bloor, D. (1976), Knowledge and social image!}!,
Routledge, London; Pinch T. & Bijker, W., (1986), 'The new sociology of technology'; idem, (1984), 'The
social construction of facts and artifacts'; Russell, S., (1986), 'The social construction of artifacts: a response
to Pinch and Bijker,' Social studies 0/science, Vol. 16, pp. 331-46.
10
Thus as Bijker notes:
Basic to all 'new' technology studies is the observation that
even in the diffusion stage, the process of invention
continues.19
Nevertheless, while such approaches provide a refreshing view of diffusion as a more
dynamic process, little explicit attempt is made to account for the nature of the relationship
between diffusion and innovation. This approach tends to side step the issue by appealing to
a narrative of'development' that nevertheless still concentrates on innovative practices. In a
similar vein, Kathleen Jordan and Michael Lynch reject the term 'diffusion' in favour of
'dispersion' to disassociate their approach from the more rigid 'stage' models of
technological change?O However, such exercises in semantics fail to address the fluid and
messy relationship between innovation and diffusion, and the latter becomes somewhat
subsumed within the former. Innovation maintains its position as the central area of interest
and little effort is made to examine how diffusion affects the nature of innovation, or how
the two interact.
Furthermore, the SCOT approach has tended to focus on the debate that surrounds new
technologies while they are still controversial innovations. Behind this strategy (which also
owes its origins to SSK) lies the idea that when technologies are new and controversial the
discourses which underlie divergent opinion are more openly declared, or at least, more easy
to detect.21
Within medicine technologies which have become an institutionalised and
accepted part of clinical practice do not tend to be openly debated until a rival technology is
introduced, or in cases where its efficacy, safety or cost are called into question.22
Thus if
the intention is to concentrate directly on the dynamics of diffusion, on the way in which the
19 Bijker, W.E., (1992), 'The social construction of fluorescent lighting, or how an artifact was invented in its
diffusion stage' in Bijker, W.E. & Law, J., (eds.), Shaping technology/building society, p. 97.
20 Jordan, K. & Lynch, M., (1992), 'The sociology of a genetic engineering technique: ritual and rationality in
the performance of the "plasmid prep'" in Clarke, A.E. & Fujimura, lH., (eds.), The right tools for the job, pp.
77-114.
21 For the benefits of focussing on controversies in science see Collins, H., (1982), (ed.), Sociology ofscientific
knowledge, Bath University Press, Bath.
22 For an excellent account ofthe way in which scientific and technical black boxes are re-opened from a
representational, semiotic perspective, see Latour, B., (1987), Science in action: how to follow scientists and
engineers through society, Harvard UP, Cambridge, Mass.
11
uptake of technology is an active phenomenon, such controversy studies cannot be wholly
relied upon to provide the necessary analytical tools. Most studies such as this appear to end
as soon as the technology is placed into practice - be it in the home, in the factory or in the
hospital.23
Even studies which attempt to give greater prominence to diffusion as a central feature of
technological development have occasionally fallen into the trap of treating it as the final
stage of development. Schwartz Cowan, for example, in an otherwise fascinating account of
the significance of consumer choice embedded into wider social networks as an important
theoretical tool for understanding diffusion, describes the process itself as the 'final stage' in
the evolution of a technological system?4 However, it will be argued in this thesis that the
purchase of a technological option is not the end stage of development or 'evolution'.
Instead, it is merely the point at which a technology's development is played out in a new
arena. Rather than diffusion being a sign of its stabilisation or closure, the spread of
technologies to new arenas and sites introduces even more opportunities for the negotiation
and creation of heterogeneity: in other words, diffusion marks a shift in the nature of
development. From the activities associated with 'systems builders,25 or 'heterogeneous
engineers,26 located in very specific and specialised locations, diffusion marks the point at
which the future of a particular technology is shaped by the activities of a whole new set of
actors. These actors exist in the realm of daily practice: the home, the factory or the hospital.
Thus, diffusion is not the end of a process but the junction where two forms of innovative
activity meet. Schwartz Cowan's plea to focus attention on what she terms the 'consumption
junction' is important, but not for the reasons she posits. What is interesting about
consumption is not simply why people buy a certain technology (or why they do not) but
what they subsequently do with it: how they make it work.
23 There are, of course, exceptions to this. See, for example, Latour, 8., (1992), 'Where are the missing
masses?'
~4 Schwartz Cowan, R., (1987), 'The consumption junction: a proposal for research strategies in the sociology
of technology' in Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, TJ., The social construction o/technological systems,
p.278.
25 Hughes, T.P., (1987), 'Large technological systems'; idem, (1979), 'The electrification of America'.
26 Law, J., (1991), 'monsters, machines and sociotechnical relations' in Law, J., (ed.), A sociology o/monsters,
pp. 50-63.; idem, (1987), 'Technology and heterogeneous engineering: the case of Portuguese expansion' in
Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, TJ., (eds.), The social construction 0/technological systems, pp. 111-
34.
12
In this thesis it will be argued that innovation and diffusion are not mutually exclusive
terms. Rather, they should be regarded as the dual dimensions of an inter-linked, dynamic
process, which is continually on going. The introduction of obstetric ultrasound to each new
hospital involved a learning process amongst those who used it and, importantly, the way in
which new people and new locations adapted to it (and were simultaneously adapted by it)
shaped the developmental path of the technology. New skills, new personnel, and new
institutional arrangements represented new sites of interaction between people and
ultrasound machines that resulted in the equipment being used in previously unimagined
ways - stimulating further innovation.
Therefore, while in some circumstances it is necessary to draw a distinction between the
original innovation of a new technology and its subsequent diffusion, it needs to be borne in
mind that once the technology (and knowledge of it) has begun to spread to other areas and
contexts the two processes become very closely interconnected. The initial diffusion of
obstetric ultrasound, for example, did not automatically entail that it was a successful
technology. Rather it was during its subsequent use in practice that its success emerged.
This, of course, raises the obvious questions of what 'useful' means and by whose
definition, but these questions are themselves part of the analysis and need to be regarded
neutrally within each specific location and historical period. What is deemed a useful quality
in a large urban teaching hospital may not be deemed so in a smaller, more remote local
provider. This in turn might be related to where the machines are situated, who operates
them and how they are used within the routine of antenatal provision. Each site, therefore,
has to be regarded as a semi-autonomous unit before wider comparisons and generalisations
can be made about the factors that affected the general success of ultrasound as a diagnostic
tool.
The second major theme elaborated in this thesis concerns where the explanatory weight in
accounts of technological development should be sought. As many of the more recent
studies of technology have stressed, traditional accounts of technological change were
oversimplified and reliant on uni-directional models of development.27
In explaining why
27 See, for example, Hughes, T.P., (1987), 'Large technological systems'; MacKenzie, D., (1996), Knowing
machines; MacKenzie, D. & Wacjman, J., (eds.), (1999), The social shaping ()ftechnology: 2//(/ edition,
Oxford UP, Oxford; Pinch, TJ. & Bijker, W.E., (1984), 'The social construction offacts and artifacts'.
13
certain technologies 'succeed' while others 'fail', authors traditionally fell into various
forms of technological determinism. Even in its weakest form, such accounts relied on a
teleological form of reasoning: certain technologies 'succeed' because they work, while
others 'fail' because they do not. Thus the root explanation for the success of a technology
rested solely on its technical capabilities. The only scope for social influence in such
traditional accounts is unveiled through the distorted vision of hindsight. Social prejudice,
lack of funding or commitment etc. can be used to explain the slow uptake ofwhat will later
emerge as a 'successful' technology, while the same types of vested interests can be used to
explain why a technology which is later regarded as a failure is initially supported. Thus, as
Pinch and Bijker note, while social factors were included in such accounts of technological
development, they were used asymmetrically to account for' anomalies' - departures from
the 'ideal' model of technological development.28
More recent accounts such as SCOT, have adopted a more agnostic position in relation to
the perceived 'success' or 'failure' oftechnological designs. In this respect, once again,
SCOT took its lead from work within the sociology of science. The agenda that underpinned
SSK (and particularly the Strong Programme of David Bloor and the 'Edinburgh school')
was to uncover the social content of scientific theories?9 Whereas earlier theories had
emphasised and privileged the 'truth' and logic of science, SSK claimed instead that social
structures and social relations provided the basis of scientific theory and that, therefore, all
forms of scientific theory were inherently and primarily the product of social relations. Thus
when applied to technology studies, the aim of SCOT was to deconstruct technical artifacts
(such as the bicycle, the electric lightbulb, or the refrigerator) in order to expose their social
roots.30
To examine the history of obstetric ultrasound from this perspective would involve
uncovering the social motivations behind its success. The analysis therefore would be
focused on the various professional groups involved with ultrasound, or on the medical
profession as a whole, or on the role of the state - depending on the level of analysis desired.
28 Pinch, T.J. & Bijker, W.E., (1984), 'The social construction offacts and artifacts'.
29 See Bloor, D., (1976), Knowledge and social imagefy; Collins, H., (1982), Sociology 0/scientific
knowledge; Collins, H. & Pinch, T., (1993), The golem: what evefyone should knQ1;v about science, Cambridge
UP, Cambridge; Webster, A., (1991), Science, technology and society: new directions, Macmillan, London.
For a critique of this approach see Pickering, A., (1995), The mangle 0/practice; Woolgar, S., (1981),
'Interests and explanation in the social study of science' Social studies o/science, Vol. 11, pp. 365-94.
14
Thus, a social constructivist account would search purely in the realm of the social for
answers to why ultrasound was created and why it took the form that it did.
However, through its prioritisation of the social, this perspective suffers from what could be
termed 'social determinism'. An account which holds that it is the power relations in society
and the workings of social influence which directly affect the development of ultrasound,
appears to present the relationship between the social and the technical in a manner which is
too simplistic.
31
Technologies like ultrasound are analysed as representing and reproducing
the social relations which created them - as if the translation from social influence to
technology was simple and direct. But is it always and necessarily as easy as this to get
technical material to operate exactly as required? As Pickering has noted, technologies and
material (or non-human) agents are not infinitely malleable; nor are their properties and
abilities always predictable.32
Rather, these emerge through interactions with social actors
who 'tinker' with them to adapt the way in which they operate. Thus, while social influence
may operate on the level of choice (in terms of which trajectories of research or practice are
followed), this is an emergent and complicated process, in which 'choice' itself is as
malleable in the context of what material agents do, as those agents themselves are.
Furthermore, over-reliance on social explanation can also lead to a conceptualisation of 'the
social' as a static context which creates the world in its own image. In other words, social
power and conflict (defined in terms of gender, class, ethnicity, professional self-interest,
etc.) can appear to exist merely as stable causal explanations for other things - scientific
facts or technical artifacts, for example. As Bernike Pasveer has shown in her study of
radiography, stable social contexts do not always exist prior to the introduction of new
technologies.
33
Pasveer's account of the development of radiology attempted to show that
the content and context of that technology were both created simultaneously and inter-
dependently. Thus at the same time as the technical content of the equipment and images
were being constructed, a professional hierarchy with its own skills and knowledge was
30 Key papers here include the collected works found in MacKenzie, D. & Wajcman, J., (eds.), (1985), The
social shaping o/technology; Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, T.1., (eds.), (1987), The social construction
o/technological systems.
31 Pickering, A., (1995), The mangle 0/practice.
32 ibid.
33 Pasveer, B., (1992), Shadows o/knowledge; idem, (1990), 'Knowledge of shadows'.
15
simultaneously emerging - a context within which the new form of practice could be
enfolded. In this account of the development of x-rays, there was no stable social context in
terms of a set of professional groups and interests, whose prior existence could be used to
explain the emergence ofthe technology. In a slightly different vein, Bruno Latour's
depiction of the power ofthe laboratory to reshape the wider world in his account of Louis
Pasteur's attempts to reorganise French farming in order to reproduce the manipulation of
the Anthrax bacillus made possible in the laboratory, also provides evidence ofthe
malleability of social contexts.34
Thus traditional accounts oftechnology and social constructivist approaches view the
relationship between technology and society from diametrically opposite perspectives. If a
continuum were imagined between material reality and social reality, these perspectives
would be placed at each end ofthat line. However, it would appear that neither of these
approaches could really get to grips with what technologies are, with why they appear in the
form that they do, or with their dynamic nature. As John Law insists, technology studies is a
messy area in that the objects of inquiry do not fall neatly into anyone of the traditional
academic disciplines as a result of their 'hybrid' status as both social and technical objects.35
Exclusively prioritising either the material/technical or the social as the main source of
explanation, results in a perspective which is unable to analyse the interplay between the
two. If instead, obstetric ultrasound is viewed not as the product of technical logic or of
social influence, but rather as a form of practice which is essentially and necessarily
composed of both material and social interactions, then the analysis can look in much
greater detail at the way in which those interactions are carried out and at the way in which
they produce change.
Therefore, in order to provide as comprehensive an account of technological development as
possible, both technical, non-human factors and social factors must be analysed jointly.
34 Latour, B., (1993), The Pasteurization ofFrance, (trans!. Sheridan, A. & Law, 1.), Harvard UP, Cambridge
Mass. And London; idem, (1983), 'Give me a laboratory and I will raise the world' in Knorr-Cetina, K. &
Mulkay, M., (eds.), Science observed: perspectives on the social study ofscience, Sage, London. For a critique
of Latour's ideas in this area see Scott, P., (1991), 'Levers and counterweights: a laboratory that failed to raise
the world' Social studies ofscience, Vo!. 21, pp. 7-35.
35 Law, J., (1991), 'Introduction: monsters, machines and sociotechnical relations'.
16
Concentration on inner technical logic alone, as has been demonstrated by the social
constructivists, creates a lop-sided account which veils the social nature of man-made
objects. However, prioritising the social aspects of technology and thus veiling the way in
which the social is mutually dependant upon the material simply turns this lop-sided picture
on its head.
One approach that has avoided the pitfalls of these two extremes is actor-network theory
(ANT) which grew from the work of Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar.36
ANT makes use of
a number of concepts such as delegation, enrolment and inscription, to characterise both
technology and society as 'hybrid' entities which cannot easily or usefully be separated.
That is to say, the human and the technical are enmeshed within large sociotechnical
systems (or networks) and these networks form the basis of what is termed 'society'.
Furthermore, according to Latour, technologies represent certain human actions and abilities
which have been delegated to machines.37
On the other hand however, when humans
interact with machines, certain actions are demanded or 'requested' in order that
technologies operate and function in a useful manner. Thus, what drives technological
development for Latour, is the way in which technical solutions are continually sought to
replace potentially unpredictable human action with predictable machinic action. In terms of
the diffusion of obstetric ultrasound, therefore, such a perspective could be used to focus
attention on the interactions between ultrasound equipment and new users in new locations.
Nevertheless, despite its overt emphasis on human/non-human interactions, and its attempt
to provide a greater role for non-human (technical or material) actors in its characterisation
of technological change, ANT falls short of a truly interactional account which preserves the
key differences between conscious human action and technical or material action. As
Pickering points out, by comparing machines with texts, Latour's approach analyses
36 Calion, M., (1987), 'Society in the making: the study of technology as a tool for sociological analysis' in
Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, T.J., (eds.), The social construction 0/technological systems, pp. 83-103;
Calion, M., Law, J. & Rip, A., (eds.), (1986), Mapping the dynamics ofscience and technology, Macmillan,
Basingstoke; Law, 1. & Hassard, J., (eds.), (1999), Actor network theOlY and after, Blackwell, Oxford; Latour,
B., (1996), Aramis or the love a/technology, Harvard UP, Cambridge, Mass.; idem, (1992), 'Where are the
missing masses?'; idem, (1987), Science in action; Latour, B. & Woolgar, S., (1979), LaboratOlY life, Sage,
London & Beverly Hills.
37 This aspect of Latour's work is most clearly elaborated in Latour, B., (1992), 'Where are the missing
masses?'
17
technologies from a semiotic perspective (what is being asked of the user? what is the
message conveyed? what competencies are required?). Furthermore, the concepts of
delegation and inscription imply interchangeability between human and non-human forms
of agency which does not always exist. It is manifestly the case that in a practical, material
sense, technologies can perform actions which humans cannot. Ultrasound machines, for
example, can turn inaudible sound into visual images, whereas humans cannot. Ultrasound
machines can also 'see through' human skin, whereas humans cannot. There is, therefore,
something qualitatively different about material, technical agency which needs to be
maintained in any account of human/non-human interactions and technological change.
In The Mangle ofPractice, Andy Pickering puts forward a more nuanced analysis of
human/non-human agency in his account of the emergence of new forms of scientific
culture.38
The central metaphor in this work is the old-fashioned clothes mangle, used to
squeeze excess water from wet clothes?9 For Pickering, what goes into the mangle rarely
looks the same as what comes out of the other end. Furthermore, how a garment will look
once it has gone through this process is essentially unpredictable. The nature of the material,
the shape and position of the garment, the skill of the operator, and so on, all interact to
determine the eventual 'nature' of the post-mangle garment. Thus, as a metaphor for
scientific practice, 'the mangle' represents the way in which the emergence of new forms of
science (or the extension of scientific culture) is both inherently unpredictable and the result
of the interplay of numerous factors. That is to say, scientific practice is not the result of
either social influence or goals, nor the result of independent material circumstance. Rather,
it emerges from a mutual 'mangling' of human and material agency which, in an intertwined
and dynamic relationship with one another, mutually construct a particular scientific
practice. There are, of course, alternative interpretations of the term 'mangle' that are more
destructive in nature. Thus, to mangle can mean to destroy, mutilate, spoil, disfigure, and so
on. Nevertheless, even within such definitions, the term continues to imply unpredictability,
messiness and transformation, which are equally applied in Pickering's perspective on
sCIence.
38 Pickering, A., (1995), The mangle afpractice.
39 The adequacy of the mangle as metaphor for scientific practice is, however, questionable. The human actor
who turns the handle is ultimately in control of this technology.
18
Using the concepts of agency and emergent practice, this thesis will attempt to demonstrate
that the process of diffusion, that the actual practice of obstetric ultrasound, was a
constantly emerging phenomenon which created new forms ofthe technology in different
areas and over time. Furthermore, using an approach which highlights the dialectic between
the social and the material at the point of practice will allow the analysis to include the
many diverse aspects of this complex technology. The various professional groups,
ultrasonic waves, electronic gadgetry, computing systems, images, pregnant women, fetuses,
hospital spaces, administrations and hierarchies are all important and inter-related
dimensions of this practice, and therefore the role and relative prominence of each are at
stake and open to re-negotiation in the emergent practices of obstetric ultrasound. In other
words, these are the factors which are fed into the 'mangle' of obstetric ultrasound.
Adopting such an approach also provides a useful tool for examining the final theme which
runs through the following chapters: the importance of spatial location and local contingent
factors in the development of technology. Through a focus on the diffusion of obstetric
ultrasound, subtle differences in the technology's adoption and development in different
locations can be exposed. Thus the way in which the administration and organisation of
specific clinical settings affected (and was affected by) the technology can be examined
within the overall dynamics of diffusion. The changeover, for example, from its use in
limited 'high risk' cases to its use as a universal screening technology occurred differently
from location to location. Therefore, studying ultrasound's diffusion will provide an account
of changes such as these as they happened in different locations and across time.
Indeed, the influence of spatial and geographical location on technological change is a factor
which has been relatively neglected, particularly by the sociology of technology. This is
often especially evident in the characterisation of professional groups, where there is a
tendency to attribute a unified stance to a particular group, even when such unity does not
exist. In relation to the development of ultrasound, for example, Edward Yoxen claims that
while radiographers 'tend to be much more enthusiastic about the technology', midwives in
19
some hospitals felt that performing scans would diminish their clinical skills.4o However,
he does not go on to investigate why the latter should be the case in only 'some' hospitals,
but instead, goes on to make wider sociological comments about the receptiveness of
midwives in general to ultrasound and therefore to imply reasons for the difference in
attitude between midwives and radiographers. This type of analysis, however, excludes the
influence of historical and site-specific developments in the relations between different
professional groups with the technical realities of a new machine. That is to say, the specific
historical and local space within which the social relationships between different
professional groups are enacted is itself an important dimension of those relationships. For
example, midwives who work within institutions where they are involved with the provision
of ultrasound examinations point out the advantages of their wider professional knowledge
of pregnancy in comparison with radiographers.41 They consider themselves to have a more
holistic approach, and note that women attending routine scans often want to ask questions
relating to other aspects of their pregnancy.42 When examined in the context ofYoxen's
comments, it can be suggested that the attitudes expressed by midwives in relation to
ultrasound can be distinguished on the basis of whether or not they are actually involved
with the technology. Those who practice within institutions where midwives operate
ultrasound express a different view from those who practice in hospitals where they do not.
This can only be explained through an analysis of how ultrasound was developed in
particular clinical settings in specific locations. Only then can wider generalisations be
forwarded in a manner sensitive to local historical and institutional differences.
Methodology, or the 'heterogeneous engineering' ofthe historian
The early innovation of obstetric ultrasound was a Glasgow phenomenon carried out,
initially, in two separate sites (the Western Infirmary in the city's west end, where Ian
Donald and his team of co-workers applied the early prototypes, primarily using
gynaecology patients, and the Royal Maternity Hospital in the east end, where Donald's
40 Yoxen, E., (1987), 'Seeing with sound: a study ofthe development of medical images' in Bijker, W.E.,
Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, T.J., (eds.), The social construction oftechnological systems, pp. 281-282. See also
Yoxen, E. & Hyde, B., (1985), 'Seeing with sound: the development of ultrasound equipment in medicine'
Bulletin ofthe societyfor the social histo/)' ofmedicine, No. 37, p.93.
41 All three midwives in Aberdeen who were interviewed, and who provide routine ultrasound examinations,
mentioned this. See Chapter 4.
12 This is discussed in Chapter 4.
20
obstetric wards were located). In 1964, with the opening of the Queen Mother's Maternity
Hospital in Yorkhill (only some 400 yards from the Western Infirmary) a further Glasgow
location was added to the ultrasound map. The aim of this thesis is to track the further
diffusion of the technology; to examine its adoption and use as a clinical tool in obstetrics in
a variety of Scottish hospitals, from its commercial launch in 1963 to the beginning of the
1990s. What differences and similarities can be detected in the ways in which the
technology was introduced, used and developed from location to location and through time?
Who were the actors involved in transferring the technology and how did they achieve this?
What transformations did the technology help to bring about in hospital and clinical
organisation and, on the other hand, how did site-specific arrangements affect the
development of ultrasound in each location?
In order to trace the nuances and diversity inherent in the diffusion of ultrasound in
Scotland, a case-study approach has been adopted which traces the career of ultrasound in
four separate hospitals. These are: the Queen Mother's Hospital; Aberdeen Maternity
Hospital (which was the first Scottish institution outside of Glasgow to introduce
ultrasound); Forth Park Maternity Hospital in Kirkcaldy, Fife; and the Lewis Hospital (later
the Western Isles Hospital) in Stornoway on the Isle of Lewis. Other hospitals, such as the
other Glasgow institutions mentioned above, or Ninewells Hospital in Dundee and Perth
Royal Infirmary (which both played an early role in the diffusion of the technology) are
mentioned where their contribution helps to shed light on events and developments within
the four main case-study hospitals. These case studies represent the mixture of hospital
provision available throughout this period, from large establishments located in major urban
centres, to smaller hospitals located in small towns. The large urban hospitals provide
tertiary referral healthcare as well as serving their own popUlations, and also provide
teaching facilities for city universities. The smaller centres provide health care for the local
community only. Furthermore, the mix of institutions included also allows the difference
between urban and rural contexts to be examined. Ultrasound was not simply an urban
phenomenon and the way in which local conditions shaped the nature of the technology's
development in rural locations such as the Western Isles reaffirms the importance of
examining this technology within its varied contexts. Thus an analysis of ultrasound's
development within these different contexts should introduce enough variety to examine the
effects of site-specific factors.
21
In Science in action, Bruno Latour makes a plea for researchers into scientific practice to
'follow the actors' - to listen to what actors have to say and follow their actions in the
construction of scientific fact.
43
For Latour, the main advantage of this strategy is that it
enables researchers to avoid the pitfalls of imposing or constructing grand narratives, which
bear little relation to what scientists actually do and how they do it. Nevertheless, although
such a research strategy is attractive, there are a number of problems associated with it.
Firstly, as John Law notes, following actors too closely can present the danger oflosing
critical distance: of reifying the perspective of scientists as the only truth.44
In other words,
if only the accounts and actions of prominent scientists (or in this case doctors) are traced,
the resulting narrative may only underline their power and importance. Thus, if the method
employed is to 'follow the actors', care must be taken over which actors are chosen.
Furthermore, this form of methodology presents particular problems for the historian.
Following actors is more easily achieved through an ethnographic approach where the
researcher can observe interactions as they OCCUr.
45
To access such interactions in the past
rather than the present, the historian must rely on two main sources - written, archival
evidence and oral testimony found in the memories of the actors involved. Both of these
forms of evidence have slightly different advantages and disadvantages.
Much of the archival historical material used in this thesis was found in the Historical
Collection of the British Medical Ultrasound Society (BMUS). This collection, which is
currently held in the Queen Mother's Hospital, (although it is shortly to be transferred to the
Greater Glasgow Health Board Archives) houses a wide variety of sources relating to
ultrasound in medicine which would otherwise be scattered in a number of libraries and
attics. It includes virtually complete runs of national and international journals devoted to
the technology; a comprehensive collection of papers and correspondences by Professor
Donald; advertising literature from manufacturers and retailers; a large collection of original
images using various forms of equipment as well as a number of records relating to the use
43 Latour, B., (1987), Science in action.
44 Law, 1., (1991), 'Monsters, machines and sociotechnical relations' pp. 11-12.
45 Latour and Woolgar made particularly good use of such observational techniques in Latour, B. & Woolgar,
S., (1979), LaboratOl}' life.
22
of ultrasound at The Queen Mother's Hospital itself. To all of this can also be added the
documents, correspondences and offprints of published papers donated by a number of
prominent actors in the field of medical ultrasound. In addition, the BMUS Historical
Collection also holds a number of ultrasound machines dating from the late 1950s to the
1980s, which are due to be transferred to the Hunterian Museum at Glasgow University.
Thus, in essence, the BMUS archive itself exists as testament to the 'success' of this
technology.
Nevertheless, the wealth ofmaterial collected in this archive cannot alone shed light on the
diffusion of this technology. While it might help in accounting for the when and how of the
diffusion of ultrasound, it cannot be relied upon to explain the why. Or, to phrase it another
way, while the general pattern of ultrasound's diffusion can be traced using these sources,
the nature and dynamics ofthat diffusion are not so obviously presented. What motivated
individual hospitals to spend thousands of pounds on ultrasound equipment? What did they
hope to achieve and were those hopes fulfilled? How did they interpret the meaning of the
technology and did these interpretations change once it was put into practice? While it is
possible to detect shadows (or echoes?) of these questions in, for example, reports of
clinical cases submitted to specialist journals, or editorials, or letters to Donald, a full
account cannot be attempted without including the perspectives of the wider group of actors
who interacted with ultrasound.
Thus the material collected from the archival sources has been supplemented by the oral
testimony of those involved with the introduction, use and development of this technology
in each of the case study centres. In all over fifty interviews were conducted with
obstetricians, radiologists, midwives, clinical physicists, engineers, general practitioners and
radiographers as well as a number of women who received ultrasound during their
pregnancIes.
However, the pitfalls associated with the reliability of oral histories are legion.46
Factors
such as distortions of memory, hindsight, overelaboration of one's own role in what are later
46 See, for example, Perks, R., (1992), Oral histOf)'.' talking about the past. Historical Association in
association with the Oral History Society, London; Perks, R. & Thomson, A., (eds.), (1997), The oral histOfJ!
reader, Routledge, New York; Thompson, P., (1978), Voice ofthe past: oral histOfY, Oxford UP, Oxford.
23
viewed as historical events, the tendency for events to be reconstructed afterwards as part of
a more general life-long self narrative and so on, entail that evidence acquired through
reminiscence and memory must be approached with caution. Furthermore, the methodology
of collecting such testimonies presents its own potential problems including, for example,
interviewer bias, the general power dynamics between interviewer and interviewee, and so
47
on.
Nevertheless, while acknowledging such potential pitfalls in the reliability of oral testimony,
the fact remains that the memories of those involved with this technology provide a very
useful and otherwise unattainable insight into how it was used and developed. As all
historians are aware, any source - be it written, visual or verbal; contemporary or historical -
is subject to any number of biases and distortions and thus all sources must be approached
with caution. Therefore, while some of the forms of bias differ with the various types of
resource used, the same critical perspective is nevertheless applied.
Furthermore, the nature of the research agenda itself shapes the type of approach taken to
oral evidence. Social scientists who use qualitative methods often point to 'saturation' as the
culmination of the research gathering process.48
Thus, enough informants have been
interviewed when the data collected shows clear evidence of the repetition of similar
narratives - i.e. conducting more interviews does not yield more information. While such an
approach might be regarded as ideal, it is nevertheless rarely possible with historical
research. When attempting to reconstruct a past event by interviewing those involved there
may be few potential interviewees to approach in the first place, or problems may be
encountered in tracing relevant witnesses to events long after they took place, and thus a
'saturation point' is rarely achievable. Furthermore, this thesis is not a strict oral history but
a reconstruction of events through the examination of a variety of sources. Interviewees
were contacted using a 'snowball effect' (where each individual was asked to provide names
of other potential interviewees) or through the tracing of actors mentioned in other places.
To this oral testimony can be added the variety ofother sources used - not only in written
- - - - - - - - - - - - -
47 Bryman, A., (1988), Quantity and quality in social research, Routledge, London; Dey, I., (1993),
Qualitative data analysis, Routledge, London; Nachmias, C. & Nachmias, D., (1992), Research methods in the
social sciences, 4'h edition, Edward Arnold, Sevenoaks.
48 Dey, I., (1993), Qualitative data analysis; Nachmias, C. & Nachmias, D., (1992), Research methods.
24
form but also in the form of visual images and physical artifacts. Thus specific events have
been reconstructed (and deconstructed) from a variety of sources and therefore perspectives,
reflecting the very heterogeneity explored in the narrative. In this way, the resultant
narrative is itselfthe product of hybridisation - of the binding together of various pieces of
evidence to construct a 'workable' account. If historical research can be compared with 'the
mangle' in this scenario, then the historian is its 'heterogeneous engineer,49.
Organisation ofthe thesis
In Chapter 1 the early development of obstetric ultrasound leading to its commercial
introduction will be discussed. This chapter will focus on the activities of the group of
clinicians and engineers based at Glasgow's Western Infirmary and the University of
Glasgow's Department of Midwifery who successfully brought together industrial flaw
detecting equipment and knowledge of the anatomy, physiology and pathology of the
reproductive organs of female bodies to construct a medical imaging device for use in
obstetric and gynaecological cases. The chapter will consider the number of social and
technical modifications which were made and which culminated in a technology that
'worked': i.e., one that enabled clinical diagnoses to be made. In essence, this group of
actors performed the role of 'heterogeneous engineers'50 outlined by John Law in that they
brought together various human and non-human elements in the construction of a new
technology. Obstetric ultrasound, in other words, emerged from those activities but,
crucially, was the outcome of both active human, social agency and the material agency of
such diverse factors as the layout of the human body, the activity ofpiezo-electric crystals,
mathematical calculations, physics and electronics.
Nevertheless, in order to 'succeed' ultrasound needed to find a place in the day-to-day
organisation of obstetric medicine. Chapter 2 therefore examines the way in which
ultrasound operators in different centres investigated the clinical potential of this technology
and sought a practical role for its application in obstetrics. In this chapter it will be argued
that a number of trajectories of research were taken. Here research is examined as a
49 Law, J., (1991), 'monsters, machines and sociotechnical relations'; idem, (1987), 'Technology and
heterogeneous engineering'.
50 ibid.
25
multifarious activity - in some cases 'research' meant organised, funded projects with clear
research hypotheses and the end goal of publications. However, in other cases 'research'
was a more ad hoc procedure, including, for example, 'tinkering' with equipment to
produce better images. This chapter will also examine the way in which a 'community' of
ultrasound workers began to emerge and at the way in which links and connections were
made between like-minded individuals scattered in different locations. In essence,
ultrasound workers in different locations attempted to act together to 'stabilise' ultrasound
technology.
In the mid 1970s the nature of ultrasound scanning underwent a major transformation. One
of the most notable aspects ofthis was the emergence of 'real-time' ultrasound equipment:
forms ofthe technology that (through rapid image renewal) represented the movement of
internal structures as well as their form. Another feature of change was the proliferation of
types of scanner available and the increasing numbers of manufacturers and retail agents
providing equipment. In Chapter 3 these developments are examined in the context of
competing technological forms and consumer choices. New technology designs, some of
which were developed in the clinic while others emerged from the research and
development laboratories of commercial organisations, became increasingly available at this
time and competed with one another in an ever-expanding ultrasound market place. The
variety of equipment available and the number of small companies that emerged to produce
and market them marked a definite watershed in the historical development of ultrasound. In
this chapter the emergence of consumer choice in obstetric ultrasound will be explored by
examining the heterogeneous factors that underpinned both consumer decision-making and
subsequent usage. The qualities valued in the design of an ultrasound machine differed
markedly from one context to another. Furthermore, many of these qualities did not emerge
as important until after they were played out in practice. In other words, crucial technical
attributes emerged at the point of practice - important features which were not necessarily
related to the qualities which governed technological choices, but which nevertheless
resulted in a new configuration of the technology.
Where Chapter 3 examines heterogeneity in the development of ultrasound, Chapter 4
considers a variety of strategies employed by ultrasound workers, government bodies and
professional organisations whose goal was a greater standardisation of ultrasound practices.
26
Partly in response to the changing nature of the technology, and partly as a result of public
debate over the technology's safety in the mid 1980s, various attempts were made to lay
down guidelines and codes of practice for the training of operators and delivery of
ultrasound services. Nevertheless, it will be argued that only very minimal standardisation
was achieved and much of this existed simply as rhetoric. The reasons for this lay in the way
in which the technology had been moulded to suit its working environments.
Finally, a coda to the main thesis has been included. Here the perceptions and experiences
of thirteen women who received ultrasound at different stages in the technology's
development will be presented. These accounts are intended to provide an alternative view
of the history of this technology and thus are not directly related to the themes explored in
the main body ofthe thesis. Nevertheless, in this section what will be stressed is that, just as
ultrasound itself can be viewed as a heterogeneous and emergent phenomenon, so too the
experiences of pregnant women can and should be regarded as multi-faceted and contingent.
That is to say, for each woman exposed to ultrasound, a wide variety of social and technical
factors shaped the nature of her experience. Factors as apparently diverse as previous
obstetric history, attitude of operating personnel, position of the equipment in relation to the
woman being scanned, accessibility ofthe clinic, the type of equipment used, and so on all
contribute to the overall experience of an ultrasound scan. Thus while meta-narratives may
appear attractive as aids for understanding the experiences of women (such as, for example,
the medicalisation of the pregnant body, gender oppression in the field of obstetrics or the
alienation of pregnant women in the face of the increasing technologisation of obstetrics),
they nevertheless obscure the nature of those experiences more than illuminate them. Thus,
as with technological development itself, heterogeneity should be embraced rather than
glossed over, if an understanding of women's experiences with technology can ever hope to
be achieved.
Contained within the following pages, therefore, is an account of the career of obstetric
ultrasound in Scotland which emphasises the innovatory practices which are inherent in the
technology's diffusion, and which strives to demonstrate the diversity and heterogeneity
which existed in its adoption, application and reception.
27
Chapter 1
Heterogeneous engineering: from metal flaws to
female bodies - the emergence ofmedical ultrasound
in Glasgow
28
Introduction]
On July 21S
\ 1955, a strange experiment was carried out in the research department of
Babcock and Wilcox - a heavy engineering firm based in Renfrew. Professor Ian Donald -
obstetrician/gynaecologist and Regius Professor of Midwifery at the University of Glasgow
- arrived at the factory with two cars laden with excised fibroids and cysts from his
gynaecology patients? The purpose of this visit was to see whether industrial flaw detecting
equipment (used to locate flaws in metal welds) could distinguish between the different
types of tissue. This equipment used piezo-electric crystals to create pulses of ultrasound.
The sound waves would bounce off hidden structures and the returning echoes were
displayed on an oscilloscope as a series of spikes. The height of the spike related to the
intensity of the echo, while its position was measured by an on-screen time line.3
The
engineers at Babcock and Wilcox provided Donald with a large steak to use as a control and
Donald was shown how to operate the equipment. The results, however, surprised even him:
All I wanted to know, quite simply, was whether these various
masses differed in their ultrasonic echo characteristics. The
results were beyond my wildest dreams and even with the
primitive apparatus ofthose days clearly showed that a cyst
produced echoes only at depth from the near and far walls,
whereas a solid tumour progressively attenuated echoes at
increasing depths ofpenetration.4
In other words, with no prior experience of operating such equipment, Donald was able to
distinguish one type of tissue from the other on the basis of the manner in which the
ultrasound pulses were differentially absorbed and reflected. Fluid-filled cysts produced
strong echoes only from the points at which fluid and membrane met, whereas tumours
scattered the echo pattern - producing a number of 'blips' on the screen.
I Some ofthe primary material on which this chapter is based was kindly made available by Dr Malcolm
Nicolson, and was gathered as part of a Wellcome Trust project on the development of medical ultrasound in
Glasgow (Nicolson, Fleming & Spencer, 'The development of medical ultrasound in Glasgow, 1954-1976',
Grant award number 043174/Z/94). Any inaccuracies or erroneous conclusions are, however, my own and do
not reflect the interpretations made by Nicolson et al. I would like to acknowledge my gratitude to the grant
holders for allowing me to access this data.
2 Donald's surgeon colleague, Mr. Wallace Barr, drove the second car.
3 See McDick~n, W.N., (1976), Diagnostic ultrasonics, principles and use o/instruments, Crosby Lockwood
Staples, London.
4 Donald, I., (1974), 'Apologia: how and why medical sonar developed' Annals ofthe Royal College 0/
Surgeons 0/England, Vol. 54, p.133.
29
The success of this first experiment encouraged Donald to investigate the potential of the
technology in clinical diagnosis. In effect, this event marks the first link in a chain of events
(equally influenced by luck, chance, effort and desire) culminating in the commercial
production ofthe Diasonograph in 1963 - the world's first contact medical ultrasound
scanner.
In this chapter, the evolution of ultrasound technology in Glasgow from flaw detection to
medical diagnosis will be outlined. At the outset, it should be noted that Glasgow was not
the only location where the possibilities of ultrasound's use in clinical diagnosis were
investigated. From the late 1930s various attempts were made in a number of locations in
Austria, Sweden, the USA and Japan, to image a number of biological structures. Accounts
of these research activities are documented elsewhere.5
However, the direct origins of the
first form of obstetric ultrasound can be found in Glasgow in the late 1950s. There are
already a number of publications dealing with the innovation of medical ultrasound in
Glasgow which, taken together, provide a detailed reconstruction of the activities and
experiences of Professor Donald and his colleagues.6
The chronology and nature of the
events which took place are thus already well-documented elsewhere and will not, in the
main, be challenged here. Thus the intention of this chapter is not to simply (re)present the
history of ultrasound's innovation, but rather to re-examine it from a slightly different
perspective. Within the following pages, the complex and heterogeneous nature of
5 Blume, S.S., (1992), Insight and industl)'.' on the dynamics oftechnological change in medicine, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass. and London, chapter 3; Woo, J., (accessed May, 2001), A short histOlY ofultrasound in
obstetrics and gynecology, part I, (www.ob-ultrasound.net/history); Yoxen, E., (1987), 'Seeing with sound: a
study of the development of medical images' in Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, TJ., (eds.), The social
construction oftechnological systems, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass. and London, pp. 281-303; Yoxen, E. &
Hyde, B., (1985), 'Seeing with sound: the development of ultrasound equipment in medicine' Social histO/Jl of
medicine, No. 37, pp. 93-5.
6 Blume, S.S., (1992), Insight and industly; Fleming, J.E.E. & McNay, M.B., (1999), 'Forty years of obstetric
ultrasound 1957-1997: from A-scope to three dimensions' Ultrasound in medicine and biology, Vol. 25, No.
1, pp. 3-56; Levi, S., (1997), 'The history of ultrasound in gynecology 1950-1980' Ultrasound in medicine and
biology, Vol. 23, No.3, pp. 481-552; Nicolson, M., (unpublished paper), 'The experiment and the image: Ian
Donald's first application of ultrasound to biological materials'; idem., (unpublished paper), 'Ultrasound
imaging and the anti-abortion debate: Ian Donald's clinical holism'; Nicolson, M. with Fleming lE.E. &
Spencer, I., (unpublished draft chapter), 'Ultrasound before Donald'; Oakley, A., (1984), The captured womb:
a history ofthe medical care ofpregnant women, Blackwell, Oxford, chapter 7; Woo, J., (accessed May,
2001), 'A short history of ultrasound;' Yoxen, E., (1987), 'Seeing with sound;' Yoxen, E. & Hyde, B., (1985),
'Seeing with sound'.
30
ultrasound's early innovation will be emphasised, by reconstructing the varied experiences
of the clinicians and engineers involved.
In particular, the work of Ian Donald and his clinician colleagues will be compared with that
of Thomas Graham Brown - the industrial engineer who formed part of the original three-
man team of ultrasound workers in Glasgow. Brown was a young research engineer when,
in 1956, he became involved with medical ultrasound. In the late 1950s and early 1960s he
was chiefly responsible for the maintenance and development of prototype machines and
thus played a prominent role in the technology's transformation into a clinical device.
Nevertheless, Brown's contribution has been somewhat neglected in the accepted historical
accounts, which have focussed far greater attention on the work of Donald. 7 Part of the
reason for this lies in the fact that Donald's association with the technology is more widely
known and, certainly within the medical profession, he is generally identified as its
'inventor'. Furthermore, as an eminent University professor, Donald had far greater
opportunities to publish and present papers relating to his experiences than Brown. Thus
much of the accepted account has been acquired through Donald's recollections. In
presenting Brown's perspective on these events, it is not the intention of this chapter to cast
doubt on existing versions of this narrative, but rather to augment them. Brown's account is
different in that it focuses much greater attention on the engineering aspects of medical
ultrasound, in comparison to the technology's medical dimensions. It therefore enables a
more complex and multi-faceted reconstruction of innovation to be presented.
What will be highlighted is the way in which a variety of material agents were marshalled
into relationship with one another by the innovative intentions of a number of human actors
to create a 'working' practice. Furthermore, it will become apparent that this technology
emerged from these activities in a manner not wholly envisaged by its human 'inventors'. In
other words, through a process of trial and error, and through the interplay of material and
human agency a new form of clinical practice emerged. In The mangle ofpractice, Andy
Pickering characterises innovations of this nature as the outcome of what he terms a 'dance
7 It is clear from reading Brown's interview transcripts and his written account of his role in the development
of ultrasound, that he himself feels he has not been properly acknowledged as the 'inventor' of the compound
sector scanner (or B-scanner as it became known). Nevertheless, this chapter should not be read as an attempt
to argue Brown's case, but merely to present his perspective.
31
of agency'.8
Human actors manipulate the technical or material dimensions of an existing
technology or practice. They then wait and watch what occurs when the technology
performs its part of the 'dance', before re-engaging to make changes and amendments in
response. Thus, innovations in technique and/or technology are the emergent outcome of
human and material interactions. The emergence of medical ultrasound in Glasgow between
1955 and 1963 can be characterised as the result ofjust such a 'dance of agency', with
clinicians, engineers, and a variety of electronic, physical and biological components taking
their 'turn' on the floor.
Furthermore, in their efforts to keep the medical ultrasound project afloat, the human actors
involved developed a number of different skills and capabilities, and moved around in a
variety of arenas. In these activities it is possible to spot resonances of what John Law
describes as 'heterogeneous engineering'.9
Operating in a variety of social and technical
fields, the members of the Glasgow team facilitated the creation of a new entity: medical
ultrasound. In other words, the technology that they created did not emerge in some pure
sense from their social interests - it was not simply an embodiment or reflection of their
goals, intentions and interests, a fa Pinch and Bijker.1o
Instead, medical ultrasound emerged
from a variety of technical and social interactions and activities, enacted in a number of
arenas. Furthermore, the joining together of such disparate entities as sound waves, human
pathologies, valves, electronic switches, oscilloscopes, etc., altered also the skills and
capabilities of the human actors: they learned a new language and set of practices which had
not previously existed, and which gradually emerged with the technology.
8 Pickering, A., (1995), The mangle o/practice: time, agency and science, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago and London.
9 Law, J., (1991), 'Introduction: monsters, machines and sociotechnical relations' in Law, J., (ed), A sociology
o/monsters: essays on power, technology and domination, Routledge, London, pp. 1-25; idem, (1987),
'Technology and heterogeneous engineering: the case ofthe Portuguese expansion' in Bijker, W.E., Hughes,
T.P. & Pinch, TJ., (eds), The social constmction o/technological systems: new directions on the sociology
and histmy o/technology, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp. 111-34. There are also a resonance between
Law's 'heterogeneous engineers' and Thomas Hughes's 'systems builders'. See Hughes, T.P., (1999), 'Edison
and electric light' in MacKenzie, D. & Wajcman, J., (eds), The social shaping o/technology: 2'/(' edition, Open
University Press, Buckingham, pp. 50-63.
10 Pinch, TJ. & Bijker, W.E., (1984), 'The sociarconstruction of facts and artifacts; or how the sociology of
science and the sociology oftechnology might benefit each other' Social studies 0/science, Vol. 14, pp. 399-
441.
32
However, Donald's first experiment at the Babcock and Wilcox factory poses the question
of what motivated him to apply a piece of industrial equipment to human biological tissues.
Part of the explanation of how ultrasonic waves and human bodies first came into contact
with one another in Glasgow, can be found in the influences of war, industry and medicine.
Following the sinking ofHMS Titanic in 1912, a British meteorologist made the suggestion
that sound waves could be used to detect underwater icebergs. Nevertheless, it was during
the First World War that serious effort was made to develop a device to achieve this-
although the primary 'target' had changed from icebergs to submarines. This work
continued throughout the interwar period and during the Second World War major
developments were made in the equipment used for what had now become known as sound
navigation and ranging (SONAR). Within industry, it was Soviet physicist S.Y. Sokolov
who first made the suggestion that reflected ultrasound waves could be used to image flaws
within various materials in 1928.11
It was not until 1945, however, that Firestone published
his findings with the 'Reflectoscope' - the first commercially available A-scope metal flaw
detector. Much of the innovation and early use of the Reflectoscope had been conducted as
part of the US war effort and was therefore classified until the end of the war.12 With post-
war demobilisation in the 1940s, the skills and technical advances made during wartime
were available to the industrial sector, further stimulating technological change. 13
In addition to the work done in the military and industrial contexts, ultrasound technology
had also begun to appear within medicine. In Austria during the late 1930s and the 1940s,
the Dussik brothers created representations of the inside of the head by transmitting
ultrasound through the skull. While their findings were later disproved (images produced by
the Dussiks which claimed to display ventricles, were reproduced using empty skulls) their
work did inspire others to investigate the technology's use within medicine. 14 By the early
II For a more comprehensive account ofthe early history of ultrasound see Blume, S.S., (1992), Insight and
industlY; Fleming, lE.E. & McNay, M.B., (1999), 'Forty years of obstetric ultrasound;' Levi, S., (1997), 'The
history of ultrasound in gynecology;' Yoxen, E., (1987), 'Seeing with sound'.
12 Nicolson, M. with Fleming J.E.E., (unpublished draft chapter), 'Ultrasound before Donald'.
13This lends weight to Pickering's claim that the main developments in technoscientific culture occur in the
overlapping dimensions of destruction and production. See Pickering, A., (1995), The mangle a/practice, ch7;
Pickering, A., (1995), 'Cyborg history and the World War II regime' Perspectives on science, Vol. 3, No. I,
pp. 1-48.
14 Nicolson, M. with Fleming lE.E., (unpublished draft chapter), 'Ultrasound before Donald'.
33
1950s Howry and Bliss in Denver, Colorado, Wild and Reid in Minnesota, Uchida in
Tokyo, and Edler and Hertz in Sweden, were also investigating the technology's diagnostic
potential. 15 Furthermore, a slightly different form of ultrasound had been used in
therapeutics from the late 1920s. Unlike flaw detectors (which created images on the basis
of reflected echoes of pulsed ultrasound), ultrasound therapy involved the continuous
transmission of high frequency sound, which created heat in biological tissues. Thus the
intention here was to effect change in tissue structures.16
However, the use of significant pieces of machinery within medicine was not without its
precedents and ultrasound was by no means the first such technology to be used. Diagnostic
radiology in particular could be regarded as a model for ultrasound - a diagnostic technique
in which the body is exposed to radiation in order to create a shadow image representing the
structures the rays encounter on their passage through the body.17 In addition, it would
appear that there was some scope for a new diagnostic device in gynaecology. The most
commonly used method for diagnosing the presence of tumours or cysts was abdominal
palpation. However, in obese patients this method was often inadequate. According to
Donald this was one of the reasons for his interest in ultrasound, as a possible alternative to
palpation.18 Thus the context of ultrasound's military and industrial applications, the
attempts being made by others to use ultrasound for medical diagnoses, as well as the use of
other imaging techniques in medicine and the diagnostic problems associated with
15 Blume, S.S., (1992), Insight and industry; Fleming, J.E. & McNay, M.B., (1999), 'Forty years of obstetric
ultrasound;' Woo, J., (accessed May, 2001), 'A short history ofultrasound; , Yoxen, E., (1987), 'Seeing with
sound'. For a direct comparison ofthe work done by Howry and Bliss, and Wild and Reid, see Koch, E.B.,
(1993), 'In the image of science? Negotiating the development of diagnostic ultrasound in the cultures of
surgery and radiology' Technology and culture, Vol. 34, pp. 858-893; idem, (1990), 'The process of
innovation in medical technology: American research on ultrasound, 1947-1962' unpublished PhD thesis
(University of Pennsylvania).
16 Indeed, Donald's preference for the term 'medical SONAR' was motivated by his desire to distance his
innovation from the potentially harmful effects associated with ultrasound therapy. Donald, I., (1969),
Practical obstetric problems: 4111
edition, Lloyd-Lukes (Medical Books) Ltd., London, chapter 28, p. 928;
idem, (1976), 'The biological effects of ultrasound' in Donald, I. & Levi, S., (eds.), Present andfitture of
diagnostic ultrasound, Wiley, New York and London, p. 21.
17 See Wolbarst, A.B., (1999), Looking within: how x-ray, CT, ultrasound, and other medical images are
created, and how they help physicians save lives, University of California Press, Berkeley, Los Angeles and
London. See also Pasveer, B., (1992), 'Shadows of knowledge, making a representing practice in medicine: x-
ray pictures and pulmonary tuberculosis, 1895-1930' PhD Thesis (University of Amsterdam), published by
CIP-Gegevens Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Den Haag; idem, (1989), 'Knowledge of shadows: the introduction of
x-ray images in medicine' Sociology ofHealth and Illness, Vol. 11, No.4, pp. 360-81.
18 Indeed, Donald claimed that obesity was especially prevalent amongst the women of Glasgow! Oakley, A.,
(1984), The captured womb, p.157.
34
palpation, render this early experiment understandable.
Nevertheless, in order to fully grasp how the apparently disparate entities of flaw detectors
and female pathological growths came into contact with one in Glasgow at this particular
time, a number of contingent and accidental factors need to be included. No small part of
this rests with the unusual character of Donald himself.
Ian Donald was born in Cornwall in 1910 and was the third generation of a family of
Scottish doctors. 19 Educated first in Scotland (at Warriston School in Moffat and Fettes
College in Edinburgh) and later, after the family emigrated, in South Africa, he received his
BA from Cape Town University in 1930. He then moved to London to train in medicine,
going on to specialise in obstetrics and gynaecology in the 1940s. After two Readerships at
St. Thomas's and Hammersmith's Hospitals in London, he arrived in Glasgow in 1954 to
take up the Regius Chair of Midwifery at Glasgow University.
Donald appears to have had an active interest in mechanical devices and technologies since
his childhood.2o
Indeed, prior to his research into ultrasound Donald had already become
associated with various technical 'toys' - inventing a mechanical device for rinsing out
bladders while he was a student, and working on a mechanical respirator for neonates with
respiratory problems?1 This predisposition marked Donald as an 'atypical' clinician in that
his research was geared not toward the use of new clinical procedures or pharmaceuticals,
but towards the utility of electro-mechanical equipment in his specialty. Indeed, Donald
apparently was nicknamed 'Mad Donald' by some of his colleagues in London and
caricatured as a crazy inventor.22
In addition to Donald's technical predisposition, his
experiences during the war also contributed to his later work with ultrasound. As a medical
officer for the RAF, Donald did his service in the Azores, and on the island of Benbecula in
the Western Isles, amongst other places. Whilst stationed on Benbecula, Donald was
19 A more detailed account of Donald's life and early career is being compiled by Nicolson, M., with Fleming,
J.E.E., (forthcoming). See also Woo, J., 'A short history of ultrasound'.
20 Nicolson, M., (unpublished paper), 'The experiment and the image: Ian Donald's first application of
ultrasound to biological materials'.
21 ibid.
22 Willocks, J., (1996), 'Medical ultrasound - a Glasgow development which swept the world' Glasgow
University Avenue, No. 19.
35
encouraged to perform additional duties. He thus became involved with the radar station and
learned a technique that, while not identical to the operation of ultrasound, was
nevertheless sufficiently similar to foster some familiarity. It was also during this period that
the RAF was active in improving its sonar techniques and Donald was very much aware of
these developments.
Nevertheless, the equipment that he initially used was a metal flaw detector rather than a
military sonar device. In this respect, the socio-economic make-up of Glasgow itself comes
into play. In the 1950s, the infrastructure of Glasgow was largely based on heavy
engineering and shipbuilding. Thus the skills and technology that Donald would later help
to integrate into medicine were very much present in the local area. Indeed, it was thanks to
a grateful gynaecology patient, whose husband was an 'eminent' engineer at Babcock and
Wilcox, that Donald was put in touch with that particular firm.23
One final event of significance occurred in London in the early 1950s when Donald was
introduced to Dr John J Wild - who had already published his initial findings on clinical
diagnoses using pulsed ultrasound.24
This, it could be argued, created yet another link
between ultrasound waves and human bodies in Donald's imagination.
It is clear, therefore, that even at this early stage in the history of the technology a number of
factors (such as chance, personal interest, local infrastructure and industry, previous
experiences, etc.) coincided to create the right circumstances for the development of medical
ultrasound. Nevertheless, it is important to emphasise that this should not be read as an
account of 'background' context, into which ultrasound can simply be slotted. Instead, such
factors as Glasgow's industrial heritage should be viewed as one of the many influential
factors that contributed to Donald's early experiment with ultrasound. Furthermore, the very
fact that the experiment worked, that with little need for 'tinkering' the equipment produced
a sufficiently clear distinction between different tissue types, played its part in carrying the
enterprise forward. As Donald himself put it:
23 Donald, I., (1974), 'Apologia'.
24 Wild, 1.1., (1950), 'The use of ultrasonic pulses for the measurement of biological tissues and the detection
of tissue density changes' SurgelY, Vol. 27, pp. 183-88. For an analysis of Wild's work see Koch, E.B.,
(1993), 'In the image of science?'
36
Accident and good luck have combined at the right time to
open up for our profession a new diagnostic dimension. No
credit can be claimed for what is after all a coincidence...25
Creating a 'working' medical machine
There is a substantial difference between the direct scanning of excised cysts and fibroids,
and scanning them while in vivo. Donald's next goal, therefore, was to acquire a machine
that could be used in the hospital.
From Professor Mayneord in London, Donald was loaned a Kelvin Hughes Mark lIb
'supersonic' flaw detector. Mayneord, in conjunction with RC Turner had been
experimenting with the device at the Royal Cancer Hospital (now the Royal Marsden),
attempting to locate lesions and tumours in the brain by imaging the displacement in the
midline echo.26
These experiments had, however, been largely unsuccessful and Mayneord
was somewhat disillusioned. Donald, on the other hand, was optimistic following his initial
experience with the technology at Babcock and Wilcox. Neveliheless, his attempts to image
the female body using the new equipment in The Western Infirmary were considerably less
successful than his first experiment.
The most significant reason for this lack of success was that this machine was incapable of
obtaining echoes from less than 8cms from the face of the transducer, which posed obvious
problems for its use in both gynaecology and obstetrics. This was therefore a very important
material resistance which DonalJ would have to accommodate. He could not simply apply
the probe to the patient's skin and get it to perform for him - he had to find a way around the
material realities of the equipment with which he was working.
In an attempt to accommodate the 'blind' 8cms, water-filled rubber buckets were employed
to create a liquid barrier between the probe and the patient. Water is a good conductor of
25 Donald, I., (1974), 'Apologia' p.132.
26 See White, D.N., (1988), 'Neurosonology pioneers' Ultrasollnd in medicine and biology, Vo!' 14, pp. 541-
61.
37
ultrasound,27 and so the principle underlying this accommodation was to artificially extend
the distance between the bodily structures of interest and the probe. However, the interface
between gas and water is a strongly reflective surface. Thus Donald had to attempt to
prevent air becoming trapped between the bucket and the surface of the skin. In addition,
therefore, Donald experimented with a variety of gels and oils to couple the water barrier to
the patient's skin, a rather more messy procedure in practice than in theory:
It does not take much imagination to think of the bizarre
situation of balancing a bucket with a plastic bottom and filled
with water on top of a female abdomen smeared with coupling
oil and then trying to interpret echoes using a probe dipped
gingerly into the surface. Accidents resulting in wet beds were
frequent and the echo information, such as it was, proved
. 11' 'bl 28
umnte 19l e.
While this account might be somewhat amusing, it should be remembered that many of
Donald's gynaecology patients were elderly women. Wet beds also entailed wet patients, for
which Donald incurred the wrath of the Matron.29
Donald experimented with other means of
achieving a water 'stand-off including water-filled balloons and, eventually, condoms.
Purchasing the latter in bulk was not particularly straightforward in the late 1950s. One
particular anecdote recalled by Donald is worth presenting in full:
I was being visited in Glasgow at the time by myoid friend
the late Professor James Louw of Cape Town University and
on passing the top end of West Nile Street he said he would
run into one of those shops that sell rubber goods and buy me
a collection, as he himself was not known in this town.
However, to the astonishment of the person behind the
counter who asked whether he wanted plain or teat ended
condoms he said he did not know but would run out to the car
and find out.30
1.7 It is interesting to note that this material property of ultrasound was not the spur for the development ofthe
'full bladder technique' - where the patient is asked to fill her bladder to provide a sounding tank for the
ultrasonic waves. Rather, this technique was a discovery made years later and seemingly accidentally (see
Chapter 2).
28 Donald, 1., (1974), 'Apologia', p.134.
29 Donald, 1., (1974), 'Sonar - the story of an experiment' Ultrasound in medicine and biology, Vol. I, p.ll 0
30 ibid.
38
At this time, Donald was receiving technical help from the medical physics staff of the
hospital, who were also part of the Regional Physics Department. This department, which
had been formed in 1953 by Professor John Lenihan31, provided both on-site medical
physicists and a wider network of specialists in the area. Thus Donald was provided with a
physicist to assist in his endeavours to produce readable, understandable images with,
however, little success.
It was at this point that luck and accident again played a part, with the arrival of Tom
Brown. Thomas Graham Brown was a young research engineer at Kelvin Hughes, Ltd. - the
company who had supplied Donald's flaw detector. Although Brown was only twenty three
years of age, and still a trainee engineer, he had worked on the design of an automatic
ultrasound scanner for industrial testing (to assess welds in metal structures) in 1953.
However, in 1956, when he became involved in Donald's project, he was no longer working
in the area of ultrasonics, but on what he terms a 'very lowly' project designing smoke
detectors for factory chimneys.32 Friends of Brown from Kelvin Hughes (who were
installing an experimental shadowless lamp in Donald's operating theatre)33 mentioned that
the doctor there was 'using a flaw detector on people,?4
Not knowing any better, I looked Donald up in the book, and
telephoned him that evening. He was friendly and very
courteous, but told me that he had all the technical help he
needed from Dr. John Lenihan's 'Regional Medical Physics
Department'. However I was welcome to come and see what
h d  35
e was omg.
This is how Brown recollects the scene which confronted him when he arrived at the
Western Infirmary to see Donald's machine in action:
31 Lenihan's PhD thesis was on acoustics, measuring the speed of sound using pulsed sound waves (Lenihan,
J., (1948), 'The velocity of sound in air' unpublished PhD thesis (University of Glasgow). It was thus perhaps
unsurprising that he should show at least some interest in Donald's endeavours.
32 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'Development of ultrasonic scanning techniques in Scotland, 1956-1979:
personal recollections ofT.G. Brown' (British Medical Ultrasound Society (BMUS) Historical Collection).
33 This also highlights the inter-relatedness of the industrial and clinical fields when connections between
manufacturing firms and clinical departments are made. Nevertheless, the relationship between Donald's
department and Kelvin Hughes would get more intimate over the next few years.
34 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'Development of ultrasonic scanning' p.2.
35 ibid.
39
One of the things that was noticeable about it [the machine]
was the front panel had a gaping hole in it where somebody
had been at it with a hacksaw. Also sitting on the trolley was a
big jar of Vaseline and a glass cylinder about 10 inches long
and about two and a half to three inches diameter, open at
both ends, and a large jug of water and plenty of towels. So
the patient was wheeled in and the Professor in his best
bedside manner pulled back the covers exposing this large
abdomen. He picks up the glass cylinder and smears one end
with Vaseline and sort of brings it on to the abdomen, picks
up the jug of water, fills the cylinder up with water and then
picks up the probe and sticks it in the end. '" [T]he real fun
started when he tried to get the water back out of the cylinder
and into the jug, which is why there was plenty of towels?6
Brown realised there and then why the clinician was having so much trouble creating
images. First of all, although the flaw detector was a Kelvin Hughes design, it was not
actually manufactured by the firm. It dated from the latter part of the war years and had been
made by another company to Kelvin Hughes's specifications under a Ministry of Supply
contract. More importantly, however, the Mark IIb had been designed to have two separate
probes - one to produce the pulses of ultrasound and the other to pick up the returning
signal. What Brown noticed was that at some point this particular machine had been
modified (inadequately, by 'someone who should have known better,3?) so that one probe
could both transmit and receive the sound waves:
... [I]t had been 'converted' to a single-transducer operation by
simply connecting the output of the transmitter pulser more-
or-less directly into the amplifier input. This caused the
amplifier, never designed for such insult, to go into complete
paralysis for several hundred microseconds, before staggering
back into some degree of normal function. '" Donald had to
arrange some sort of water standoffto allow the amplifier to
de-saturate before echoes started to come back from the
patient.38
Not wishing to insult the physicist from Lenihan's department who was also present, by
explaining what was causing the problem, Brown diplomatically offered to try and get
36 Tom Brown, interviewed by Ian Spencer, (courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer and Fleming).
37 ibid.
38 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'Development of ultrasonic scanning' p.3.
40
Donald a 'newer' machine - i.e. one which had not been tampered with. Again, Brown's
account of how he 'acquired' a new machine is interesting, not just in terms of its historical
significance, but also in terms of the expediency and luck involved in the event. The man
for whom Brown had worked on the automatic flaw detector (Alex Rankin) was now based
at Kelvin Hughes's main factory at Barkingside in London:
So I phoned up Alex ... and explained the situation to him.
Alex never respected formalities so the next thing was I got a
phone call, 'Tom, get yourself into Glasgow Central Station,
you will find there is a package for you'. Here was a brand
new Kelvin Hughes Mark IV flaw detector, 600 worth in
1956, (a lot of brass), in its original packing, brand new. It
weighed a tonne?9
I didn't drive then, but got that brute of an instrument out of
the station and into a taxi, and up to the Western Infirmary,
then onto a patient cart, and up to Donald's Gynaecology
Unit.4o
Thus, Donald was unofficially 'gifted' the latest model of flaw detector made by Kelvin
Hughes and at the same time Brown was secured a position in the team. As it would tum
out, despite the fact that the improvements which came with the new machine were
considerable ('the results were as different as chalk and cheese,41), in the long term it would
be the technical expertise which Brown brought to the team which was most significant
about this event.
Brown's arrival, however, effectively drove a wedge between the ultrasound workers and
Lenihan's department. In Brown, the team had the experience with ultrasound technology
they had previously lacked and which, in that sense, superseded the expertise which could
be offered by Medical Physics at that time. It must be remembered that the remit of Medical
Physics extended to much more than simply the innovation of a medical ultrasound device
and at this time Lenihan himself was busy building up his department, which was the first
39 Tom Brown, interviewed by Ian Spencer, (courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer and Fleming).
40 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'Development ofultrasonic scanning' p.3.
41 Tom Brown, interviewed by Ian Spencer (courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer and Fleming).
41
regional service of its kind in the UK.42 The physicist from Lenihan's team who was
previously involved in the project, Dr Greer, gradually disappeared from the scene as the
young engineer from Kelvin Hughes increasingly upstaged him. It would appear that this
caused something of a rift between Lenihan and Donald, which was not really reconciled
until the late 1960s, when Lenihan's department began taking a much more direct and active
role in the diffusion ofultrasound.43
On the other hand, as an engineer for Kelvin Hughes, Brown was able to provide a link
between the medical workers and the commercial interests of his firm. Thus the an-ivaI of
Brown marked the start of a longstanding relationship between Donald's project and Kelvin
Hughes which would last until the company finally ceased its activities in ultrasound in
1966.44
In addition to the new scanner, Brown was also able to 'scrounge' an oscilloscope camera,
which could be used to record the scan on 35mm film. The different goals and intentions of
the team members are nicely illustrated in their attitude to this extra 'acquisition'. For
Donald, this camera was very significant indeed. Not only did it enable some form of record
to be kept of the scan, it also meant that actual scan images could be printed in any
published work. For him, publishing an account of his work in the appropriate peer review
journals was a necessary prerequisite ifhis innovation was going to make it to a wider
audience. As Latour has noted in the context of science, publications and the translation of
scientific activity into textual representations are an important means of enrolling peer
support for a new idea.45
For Brown, on the other hand, it was simply another thing he had
managed to illicitly obtain; he already had other concerns on his mind.
42 The fact that Scottish teaching hospitals were managed by Regional Hospital Boards, rather than individual
boards of governors as they were in England, made the Scottish system more amenable to the development of
such regional services.
43 See Chapter 2. Brown attributes some of the apparent acrimony which developed between Lenihan's
depmtment and Donald's project team in this early period to his own over-enthusiasm and lack of diplomacy:
'unfortunately, I am about as tactful as a JCB in a hurry' (Tom Brown, interviewed by Ian Spencer, (courtesy
ofNicolson, Spencer & Fleming.
44 Kelvin Hughes merged with Smiths Industries in 1961. The factory at Hillington was closed in 1966, after
Smiths pulled out of Scotland. At this time the medical ultrasound interest was sold to Nuclear Enterprises. See
Chapter 2.
45 Latour, B., (1987), Science in action: how to follow scientists and engineers through society, Harvard UP,
Cambridge, Mass., ch.l.
42
One group, two projects
It was at this time that the different backgrounds of the engineer and the clinician brought
divergent goals and intentions to the fore. In a sense the ultimate goal remained the same -
both Brown and Donald were aiming to produce clinically reliable images which could be
repeated and used in actual practice for diagnoses. However, the way in which they
approached this goal differed considerably.
Armed with his new and easier-to-use scanner, Donald set to work establishing the
parameters of the images produced by the A-scope display. In other words, he sought a way
of looking at the 'right' blips on the screen: interpreting the vast amount of information
generated into adequate 'rules of thumb' for what type of echo display corresponded to what
type of structure. It was at this point that Dr John MacVicar46 joined Donald in these clinical
investigations, completing the three-man team who co-authored the first publication in
1958.47
By 195617, Donald and MacVicar were building up considerable experience using the A-
scope machine - scanning hundreds of cases (although not yet using the teclmology as a
practical diagnostic tool). Nevertheless, their interest in, and enthusiasm for, the equipment
was a source of mirth amongst some of their clinician colleagues. For example, according to
MacVicar:
Even after our first publication in 1958 an eminent
gynaecologist summed up the use of ultrasound as only being
of use to gynaecologists who were deaf, dumb and blind and
had lost the use of their hands!48
What particularly appears to have amused them was the technological complexity of
Donald's approach to the differentiation of structures which, for them, could easily be
46 MacVicar was appointed as a Registrar in the Department of Obstetrics and Oynaecology in 1956. He
remained in Glasgow (as Lecturer and then Senior Lecturer) until 1974.
47 Donald, 1., MacVicar, J. & Brown, T.O., (1958), 'Investigation of abdominal masses by pulsed ultrasound'
Lancet, Vol. 1, pp. 1188-95.
48 This was included in an obituary, written by MacVicar following the death of Ian Donald in 1987. BMUS,
(1987), Bulletin ofthe BMUS, No. 46, September, p.6.
43
achieved through abdominal palpation. Indeed, this epitomises the difference between
Donald's approach to his role as a gynaecologist/obstetrician and that of the majority of his
fellow-professionals. Donald's predisposition towards technology and electronic equipment
lay in stark contrast to the attitude of most other clinicians in his field at the time. In their
view, twiddling with electronic equipment and so on was not what gynaecologists and
obstetricians did and they did not see the benefit of using such equipment when the
'traditional' skills of their profession seemed perfectly adequate. In this respect, the
difference between Donald's method and that of other obstetricians can be characterised as a
conflict between the 'art' and 'science' inherent in 20th
century medicine as identified by
Chris Lawrence.49
Donald and MacVicar's more 'scientific' approach was considered by
some of their peers as unnecessary, given the skills and tacit knowledge of traditional
practices. Thus Donald's activities were far from characteristic of his profession, which in
part explains the mirth, and occasional hostility, which he received at the hands of certain of
his colleagues.
An important breakthrough for Donald in this respect came when he and MacVicar
successfully diagnosed a large ovarian cyst with their machine, in a patient who had been
diagnosed (clinically - via palpation, and radiologically) with cancer of the stomach:
My medical colleagues were gathered round to see the
demonstration and I had explained that I expected to find
bowel echoes floating up towards the centre. You can imagine
my dismay when on applying the probe to the most
protuberant part of the patient's abdominal wall there were no
bowel echoes to be seen in this area but simply a large clear
space presumably of fluid with a very strong echo at great
depth almost offthe screen. Just at this moment Dr. MacVicar
came looking for me, poked his head over the screen and
commented, 'Seems a large cyst.' I apologised, of course, to
my medical colleages [sic] and modestly pointed out that the
machine might not be working very well.50
49 Lawrence, C., (1985), 'Incommunicable knowledge: science, technology and the clinical art in Britain, 1850-
1914' Journal ofcontempormy history, Vol. 20, pp. 503-20.
50 Donald, I., (1974), 'Sonar - the story of an experiment' p.lll.
44
The fact that the diagnosis had been made by the Professor of Medicine, who was also
present at this demonstration, added further significance to this event, as John MacVicar
recalls:
I remember Professor Donald kicking me under the bed-
screen and saying, 'Not at all, it is a malignancy, the Professor
of Medicine says so.' So I kept quiet after that.51
MacVicar, however, stuck with his interpretation. The woman was referred for a laparotomy
and a large, mucinous ovarian cyst was removed. She duly recovered, and her recovery
simultaneously provoked greater interest in Donald's research, both from the engineering
firm of Kelvin Hughes and from colleagues. Here again the dialectics of the relationship
between the technical and the social are very much evident. The success of this
demonstration of his equipment (in terms of its ability to diagnose; to inform clinical
treatment - in other words to do something which in its absence would not have been
possible without surgery) caused a re-alignment and re-evaluation of outsider impressions of
the technology. This was not brought about wholly by Donald's confident promotion of his
machine or by the team's general enthusiasm regarding its potential. Rather the material
properties of ultrasound were shown to 'work' in this demonstration and therefore those
material/technical properties themselves also contributed to a change in attitudes.
The effect of Donald's poignant demonstration of his equipment's capabilities was two fold.
First of all, in all likelihood, it boosted the Glasgow ultrasound team's confidence in the
future of their work, providing them with renewed vigour. In addition, however, it
effectively removed the very core of the weapon used to scorn the innovation amongst those
not associated with the project - i.e. that it was of no clinical benefit. Had Donald's
diagnosis been wrong, due to some hitch or problem in the mechanics of the machine, the
weight that this may have added to the views of his sceptics might have proved difficult to
overcome. Instead, the success of this demonstration may have added immeasurable impetus
to the teclmology's development. At the very least, doubting colleagues would have been
51 Tansey, E.M. & Christie, D.A., (eds.), (2000), WeI/come witnesses to twentieth centlll)! medicine, volume 5.
Looking at the unborn: historical aspects ofobstetric ultrasollnd, Wellcome Trust, London, p.19.
45
forced to re-define the grounds of their objections to the technology; at most, to re-evaluate
their stance.
This is not to argue, however, that opposition to ultrasound as a clinical tool was
straightforwardly and simply overcome through the equipment's technical capabilities
alone. As a number of authors have noted, controversies over new ideas, techniques or
technologies are never closed as the result of one single factor.52
Successful experiments or
demonstrations are often refuted through an appeal to contingent factors, errors in
experimental design, extraneous variables, etc. 53 Thus, even in the late 1960s, the clinical
utility of ultrasound was still questioned:
...one of my alleged friends from the rival city of Edinburgh
rewarded our hospitality by declaring to a hilarious group of
students that in Glasgow we were employing a machine
costing more than 10,000 in order to diagnose an ovarian
cyst which he could feel with a two-penny glove.54
Rather, it would take several years of sustained promotion on the part of the Glasgow team
through the training of future specialists; dissemination of knowledge about ultrasound and
its advantages via the medical journals; and dispersal of pro-ultrasound clinicians from
Glasgow to other hospitals, to convince the majority of fellow practitioners that the
technology was a useful diagnostic instrument.55 The foundation upon which such
promotion was based (in terms of the knowledge and utility claims used) was interwoven
with the emergence of the technology as artifact and practice.
While Donald and MacVicar worked on the clinical underpinning of the A-scope, Tom
Brown was effectively working to supersede this form of imaging altogether. For Brown
52 Barnes, B., Bloor, D. & Henry, 1., (1996), Scientific knowledge: a sociological analysis, Athlone, London;
Mulkay, M., (1991), Sociology ofscience: a sociological pilgrimage, Open University Press, Milton Keynes;
Pinch, T.J. & Bijker, W.E., (1984), 'The social construction of facts and artifacts'; Shapin, S., (1982), 'The
politics of observation: cerebral anatomy and social interests in the Edinburgh phrenology disputes' in Collins,
H., (ed.), Sociology ofscientific knowledge, Bath University Press, Bath.
53 In relation to experimentation, the appeal to extraneous factors to explain the 'failure of one's own
experiment, or the 'success' of a rival's is also known as the theory of 'under-determination' or the Duhem-
Quine principle. See for example the Pasteur/Pouchet debate in Collins, H. & Pinch, T., (1993), The golem:
what evelyone should know about science, Cambridge UP, Cambridge; Latour B (1987) Science in action.
54 Donald, I., (1976), 'The biological effects of ultrasound' p.21.
55 This process will be outlined in much greater detail in the following chapters of this thesis.
46
(used to the A-scan display in metal welds and structures) the differences between that and
the images created by ultrasound in the human body were immense. First of all, in his view,
there was too much information coming back in the echo pictures. Human bodies are
considerably less uniform and predictable than metal structures. The sheer number of
different tissue types, organs, fluids etc in the body created a whole variety of echoes of
different magnitudes and sizes. Furthermore, with the long pulses generated by the quartz
crystals any number of additional factors affected the resultant echoes: closely adjacent
echoes would interact with one another, any movement of the probe would create more
echoes, the normal movements ofthe body's respiratory and cardiac cycles etc., all affected
the resultant images. Thus, the very wealth of information generated was regarded in itself
as a problem for Brown.56
In essence, therefore, what Brown wanted to do was delineate 'fact' from 'artifact' in the
image; to find some way to cancel out the echoes that were of no interest to him and only
leave the ones that were. In doing this (deciding which echoes were important and which
were not) he was effectively 'creating' a reality for the images - deciding on the basis of the
clinical interests of this particular medical specialty which echoes were 'real' and which
were 'not'.57 In other words, he wanted to 'render' the image in a way which would be more
useful for gynaecological diagnosis.58
Brown interpreted the problem as a mismatch between the way in which the echoes were
displayed and the information required. The moving timeline of the A-scope provided the
only indication ofthe whereabouts of the structure being imaged: the further along the
timeline a 'blip' was, the deeper in the body it was located. While this was all that was
necessary when scanning metal welds looking for flaws, it was totally inadequate for
imaging humans in Brown's opinion. In other words, the image and the structures did not
correspond closely enough. As David Bloor has highlighted, an enduring characteristic of
56 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'Development of ultrasonic scanning' p. 4.
57 A similar account of such activities in radiology can be found in Pasveer, B. (1989), 'Knowledge of
shadows'.
58 For different analyses of the process of rendering images see Latour, B., (1986), 'Visualisation and
cognition: thinking with eyes and hands' Knowledge and society: studies in the sociology ofculture past and
present, Vol. 6, pp. 1-40; Lynch, M., (1985), 'Discipline and the material form of images: an analysis of
scientific visibility' Social studies ofscience, Vol. 15, pp. 37-66; Yoxen, E., (1987), 'Seeing with sound'.
47
scientific knowledge is the belief that the scientific method facilitates a closer
correspondence between 'nature' or 'reality' and human knowledge than other forms of
belief.59 In this respect, Brown's intentions can be characterised as driven by the desire to
present a more 'truthful' representation of the contents of the uterus. Ironically, however, to
achieve this, the images were constructed using a greater degree of manipulation and
technological sophistication - arguably shifting them further away from any 'true'
representation.
There was, however, one further dimension to Brown's assessment of the equipment. As
well as the mismatch he perceived between the echoes and the display, he also crucially saw
this as involving a mismatch between the display and the human operator. Brown felt that
the enormous wealth of information presented in the A-scope was unreadable because of the
way in which humans visualise and perceive:
In other words, and it is a theme I was to come back to time-
and-time again in the rest of my career, there was a gross
mismatch between the manner in which the data was being
presented, and the perceptual faculties ofthe observer who
had to utilise it.60
What is interesting about this is not only that Brown (unlike Donald and MacVicar) was
thinking like an engineer, but also that, crucially, he was thinking like a non-clinician. When
viewing the ultrasound images, Brown drew on his skills in engineering and compared
ultrasonic representations of the human body with his industrial engineering knowledge of
ultrasound representations of metal structures. The former he viewed as far more complex
than the latter, rendering the image far too difficult to read in its current format. Donald and
MacVicar, on the other hand, had a whole series of different skills with which to make sense
ofthe information the images afforded. Their knowledge of human anatomy, their skills in
palpation, their knowledge of the symptoms associated with various pathologies and so on,
afforded them other avenues of meaning and interpretation that were different from
Brown's.61 That, of course, is not to suggest that these skills enabled them to interpret all of
59 Bloor, D., (1991), Knowledge and social imagelY, Chicago UP, Chicago.
60 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'Development of ultrasonic scanning' pA.
61 In other words, they could utilise both the 'art' (intuitive knowledge, experience, skill, etc.) and 'science' of
their profession. See Lawrence, C., (1985), 'Incommunicable knowledge'.
48
the information in the scan. Furthermore, as demonstrated in the case of the misdiagnosed
cancer described above, clinical knowledge could not be wholly relied upon to make sense
of the ultrasound data. Nevertheless, it does mean that ultrasound could be compared and
contrasted with a host of other technologies, practices and 'ways of knowing' to generate
clinical meaning from the image. Thus the previous experience and knowledge of Brown,
and of Donald and MacVicar led them to interpret the images in a subtly different manner.
Nevertheless, the interactions between the two sets of actors, and their interactions with the
new imaging modality of medical ultrasound, meant that engineering and medical
knowledge and experience were brought together in a way which transformed both. Thus,
while it is tempting to simply attribute Brown's 'interpretation' of the equipment to the fact
that he was an engineer, it was also crucially shaped by his position as an engineer in a
clinical environment.
In this example, the dual concepts of 'interpretative flexibility' and 'relevant social group'
developed by Pinch and Bijker in their analysis of technological change are inadequate to
explain Brown's activities.62
Brown's approach was governed neither by his association
with a certain group (engineers, engineers who work in ultrasonics, etc.) nor in a sense
solely by his interactions with the technology itself. Instead, the way in which Brown
interpreted medical ultrasound was shaped by both ofthese factors and by his relationship
vis ct vis another set of social actors, and by the nature of the environment in which he
worked. Therefore, to explain how Brown formed his interpretation of the A-scope machine
requires an account which is more nuanced and less simplistic than the concept of 'relevant
social groups'.
The solution proposed by Brown to overcome the deficiencies he perceived with ultrasound
in this particular medical context was to devise a way in which to plot or graph the position
of the various echoes generated. In other words, he wanted to find some way to make the
images into a two-dimensional 'picture' and the solution he proposed was to develop some
kind of cross-sectional image.
62 Pinch, T.J. & Bijker, W.E., (1984), 'The social construction of facts and artifacts'.
49
While this idea marked a radical departure from the approach currently being taken in
Glasgow, it was not a completely new concept. In Denver, Colorado in the early 1950s,
radiologist Dr Douglas Howry and electronics engineer Rod Bliss had developed a similar
approach.63 However, their technique (which involved immersing the subject in water tanks
- the first of which was constructed from an old gun turret) was centred on producing single
sector images by rotating the probe around the patient in a linear plane. What Brown
eventually produced was something of a hybrid between the A-scope and the sector scans of
Howry, producing a two-dimensional 'map' of the pelvic area. Brown, however, claims to
have been unaware of this previous work and indeed, in hindsight, considers this to have
been an advantage:
One of the things that is often asked is this. Were we aware at
that time, or was I aware at that time, of the work done by
Douglas Howry? The answer is, curiously, 'no'. Perhaps we
should have been. ... However, I think that had we been aware
of what Howry was doing, and had set out our stall to improve
on Howry's work, we would have been stuck with immersion
. 64
scannmg.
Nevertheless, there are enough similarities between the approach taken by Brown and that
taken by Howry, to make the fact that Brown was unaware of this work very intriguing. It is,
of course, possible to argue that Brown's general sense that his contribution to the
development of medical ultrasound has been undervalued, has led him to re-evaluate his
role and, perhaps, over-emphasise the uniqueness of his work. On the other hand, Brown
was not a medical physicist but an industrial engineer and, given that Howry and Bliss
published their work in clinically oriented journals, it is entirely possible that Brown did not
know of it. Brown's explanation was that no systematic literature search was carried out
before the compound sector scanner was built. The project was not a traditional scholarly
one, but an industrial feasibility study for Kelvin Hughes, which would be followed up at a
later date by a thorough patent search.65 Thus Brown's development of a two-dimensional
63 Howry, D.H. & Bliss, W.R., (1952), 'Ultrasonic visualisation of soft tissue structures of the body' Journal of
laboratOfJ' and clinical medicine, Vol. 40, pp. 579-92. For more detailed accounts of the work of Howry and
Bliss see Blume, S.S., (1992), Insight and industlY; Yoxen, E., (1987), 'Seeing with sound'; Koch, E.B.,
(1990), 'The process of innovation in medical technology'.
64 Tansey, E.M. & Christie, D.A., (eds), (2000), Looking at the unborn, p.18.
65 ibid, (Footnote 41), p.18.
50
scanning system should be viewed as one which emerged from practice, from the problems
encountered by himself (and Donald and MacVicar) in matching one-dimensional A-scope
images to human bodies and their pathologies. It was, therefore, achieved through a process
of interactive modelling and tinkering.
According to Brown, it was not easy to convince his clinical co-workers that two-
dimensional scanning would provide better information. This he partly attributes to his own
inability to describe in understandable terms what exactly he wanted to do, but again,
divergent intentions can also be seen at work:
I found it a bit difficult to fire Donald or John MacVicar with
my 'dream'; or even make them understand it. I remember
thinking that it would be much easier just to build the thing
and show them. This is not really a criticism. They were, after
all, only recently started into exploring the medical utility of
quite an expensive, sophisticated and highly developed
electronic package which had just come, fortuitously, into
their hands. They had by no means exhausted its possibilities.
Here was a young impatient who wanted, without any tangible
resources, to rush off and radically change it all.66
In the quote above, it is possible to see the divergence between the clinical goals of Donald
and MacVicar, and the engineering goals of Brown. Nevertheless, it is important to note the
overlap between the two approaches to ultrasound - what is different here is the way in
which clinical knowledge and engineering knowledge coincide differently in the actors
involved. For Brown, the best way to improve diagnosis was to maximise the amount of
information which could be displayed by creating a more 'picture-based' image. For Donald
and MacVicar, the best way to achieve this same goal was through practice and increasing
expertise with the technology in its existing form.
Despite any reservations he might have had, however, Donald agreed to approach Kelvin
Hughes for more money to fund Brown's project. At the same time, Brown used his own
contacts in the firm to do the same. In the end, the project was awarded 500 and Brown
66 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'Development of ultrasonic scanning' pA.
51
was released from the factory for one afternoon a week to work in the hospital with
Donald.67
The scanner built by Brown was a hybrid of industrial and medical parts. Brown reclaimed
his experimental automatic weld-tester from the company's factory in Barkingside and
pillaged it for its electronic cabinet and power supplies. He also managed to 'acquire' a
slightly older Mark IV flaw detector from the company stores in Glasgow along with a
cathode ray tube (which acted as the oscilloscope for the flaw detector). The most
innovative aspect of his machine was its ability to plot the exact position of the echoes
received through the use of a complex measuring grid. This was achieved through the use of
a sine/cosine potentiometer used to calculate the position in space of the probe from the
angle of its rotation. Again, Brown's ability to 'acquire' parts was crucial here: this was a
very expensive component which alone would have cost more than his 500 budget. He
managed to 'find' a discarded one which was slightly defective and which he then fixed.
Finally, the entire machine was built on a hospital bed table which Donald borrowed from
the Western Infirmary.
Figure 1.1: Mr Thomas Brown with the prototype 'bed table' scanner circa 1958
(Photograph courtesy of the BMUS Historical Collection.)
67 Donald, I., (1974), 'Apologia' p.134.
52
The scanner worked by gradually building an image as the probe was manipulated back and
forth and moved across the patient. The pulses of sound (at a frequency of2.5 MHz) were
generated by one element in the probe and received by an adjacent crystal. The oscilloscope
and sine/cosine potentiometer then plotted the position of each echo in relation to the probe,
building up a two-dimensional representation of the structure encountered. This type of
imaging became known as compound sector scanning or B-scanning because, unlike the A-
scope, it worked in two dimensions.
Figure 1.2: Representation of the process of building an image with the compound sector ultrasound
scanner built by Brown.
COMPOUND SECTOR
(Photograph courtesy of the BMUS Historical Collection.)
In order to create images in this way, however, the probe had to be able to transmit and
receive the sound pulses and echoes from positions other than purely vertical to the skin.
This again, reintroduced the problem of air coming between the probe and the skin. Brown
overcame this by providing a 'water-bag' into which the probe was placed. As Brown
explains: 'what better container could I find than a condom?,68 Nevertheless, despite this
accommodation, the degree of reverberation was too great, and Brown abandoned the
condom in favour of direct contact scanning. This however, presented further problems.
68 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'Development of ultrasonic scanning' p.7.
53
Piezo-electric crystals generate ultrasound when they vibrate. Discs made of such crystals
provided the main firing elements in medical ultrasound technology. However, the discs
generated ultrasound in both directions - forwards (into the patient) and backwards (into the
probe). Therefore some form of backing material was used to dampen the backward
radiation and 'damp' the vibration of the disc to create a short pulse. This material was
made of some form of metal pOWder, mixed with a fixing resin such as Araldite. During
this process, tiny air bubbles became trapped in the mixture which prevented the backing
material from being entirely uniform.
Again, while this was easily accommodated when uniform structures were being imaged
using an A-scope, this represented a major obstacle to Brown. The 'non-uniform' structures
of human bodies as well as his technique to produce compound scans, translated these tiny
air bubbles into major artifacts in the image, producing echoes which appeared to represent
structures within the body. Brown and his colleague at Kelvin Hughes (Clive Ross)
experimented with a number of different materials in their attempt to overcome this
problem. They also tried mixing the resin in vacuums and under compression. Finally, they
conceded that whatever they did, they could not avoid trapping air in the wet mixture. What
happened next was an interesting accommodation: instead of trying to prevent the formation
of bubbles, they decided to help them to float out of the mixture using a high-speed
centrifuge. Thus, in another example of Pickering's'dance of agency' they improved their
acoustic backing material by redirecting their goal to accommodate material resistance.
They did not achieve an air-free mixture, but found a way to lessen its effects.
The bed table scanner went into operation in 1957 and the team began to use it as often as
possible, and on as many suspected gynaecological conditions as possible. In order to keep
track of the scans performed and their results, an elaborate file-card database was
constructed. Each card contained information on the patient and her clinical history, as well
as a number of boxes in which the details of up to 12 scans could be recorded. Polaroid
photographs of the scan images were then attached to these cards using a stapler, after
having first been painted with a protective varnish to 'fix' the image.69
Then, using a system
69 Mrs Margaret McKee, who was employed in December 1971 as the receptionist for The Queen Mother's
ultrasound service, recalls that much of her daily duties when she first took up her position involved applying
this varnish to the images. (Interview with Mrs Margaret McKee, March 1998.)
54
of holes punched into the sides of the cards, patients with similar conditions could be
identified quickly by passing a needle through the pack at the appropriate 'hole' and then
shaking out the cases of interest. Although it may seem a rather inconsequential aspect of
their work, this innovation (particularly in terms of the attachment of the Polaroid
photographs, and thus the ability to directly compare similar images) was crucial in enabling
the team to keep track of their progress.70
At this point Brown's 'heterogeneous' engineering activities became intertwined once more
with the activities of Donald and MacVicar. In a sense, therefore, the interactions between
the engineer and the clinicians can also be framed in terms of a dance of agency: Brown had
made a new machine - it was now time to see how useful it could be to the clinicians. They,
meanwhile, had been developing their skills in diagnosis using the A-scope equipment.
While Brown was building the machine, Donald and MacVicar had been experimenting
with ways of differentiating tissues by altering the frequency of the A-scope. Doing this,
they discovered, allowed them to differentiate between types of solid mass by their
'transonicity' (ability to be penetrated by ultrasound).71 At different frequencies, different
tissues (such as tumours which were previously impenetrable) could be visualised. Thus
Donald and MacVicar worked on finding the frequency which corresponded to the tissue,
effectively increasing the sensitivity of their diagnoses. Nevertheless, while these activities
gave them a greater familiarity with the A-scope, they now had to develop new diagnostic
skills for operating the B-scan machine.
The joint efforts of Donald, MacVicar and Brown were made public in 1958, with Kelvin
Hughes's patent application72
and the publication of the team's first paper.73 In this paper,
275 scans on 100 patients are described, with a variety of normal and pathological
conditions imaged. Even then, according to Donald, 'our results at that time were crude and
our successes infrequent' .74
70 This system continued to be operated until at least 1976 and a large collection ofthe original files has been
kept at The Queen Mother's Hospital.
71 Donald, I., (1974), 'Sonar - the story ofan experiment' p.ll!.
72 According to Brown, this patent covered all subsequent contact scanners. However, the financial troubles at
Kelvin Hughes during this time meant that this patent was never really enforced until the mid 1960s. Brown,
T., (unpublished paper), 'Development of ultrasonic scanning' p.8.
73 Donald, I., MacVicar, J. & Brown, T.G., (1958), 'Investigation of abdominal masses'.
74 Donald, I., (1974), 'Apologia' p.135.
55
One such 'success' however, was the first ever ultrasound diagnosis of pregnancy. The
equipment was being used to examine a woman who had been clinically diagnosed with
uterine enlargement due to fibryomata75
, but instead it was discovered that she was carrying
a 14-week fetus.76
Nevertheless, although this is the first case in which a fetus was imaged
using ultrasound, it was achieved within the context of a gynaecological diagnosis, rather
than an obstetric one. Donald, Brown and MacVicar's activities were guided by the
intention of identifying pathological gynaecological conditions, and thus what was most
important within this context was the machine's ability to enable them to differentiate
between the normal condition of pregnancy and pathological growths. In other words, their
interest was not initially motivated by a desire to monitor the fetus, or to investigate the
pathologies associated with pregnancy. Investigations of this nature, however, did not take
long to emerge.
Soon after the B-scan machine was put into operation in the Western Infirmary, and
following Donald's accidental 'discovery' of its ability to image the fetus, the original A-
scope machine was transferred to the Royal Maternity Hospital at Rottenrow. With the A-
scope equipment a fetus produced a very distinctive triple 'spike' pattern - with two large
spikes separated by a smaller spike midway between the two. These corresponded to either
side of the fetal skull and a midline echo. This spike pattern was distinctive enough to
differentiate a fetus from either fibroids or cysts. Dr James Willocks, who joined the team in
1958 and was later assisted by Tom Duggan from Professor Lenihan's department of
Clinical Physics and Bio-engineering, worked on improving the A-scope's abilities to
measure the head and on developing a model of fetal growth based on those measurements.
Thus while Donald and MacVicar investigated the B-scan's capabilities (mainly on
gynaecology cases) Willocks and Duggan began to investigate fetal development with the
A-scope.
75 Fibryomata, or uterine fibroids, are benign growths of mainly fibrous tissue. They can, however, cause
complications if they are large or numerous. Blackiston's Gould Medical DictionGl)' - second edition, (1979),
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York.
76 Donald, I. & MacVicar, J., (1963), 'Sonar in the diagnosis of early pregnancy and its complications' Joul'l1al
olobstetrics and gynaecology o/the British Commonwealth, Vol. LXX, No.3, p.387.
56
One further potential use of ultrasound in obstetrics which was investigated at this time was
its ability to demonstrate the exact position of the fetus. This 'discovery' however was not
made by any of the clinicians, but by the StaffNurse at the Royal Maternity Hospital, Miss
Marjory Marr.77
While doing his Friday morning obstetric rounds, Donald was surprised to
find that the StaffNurse could tell him in advance (before he had palpated the patient)
where the fetus lay. He discovered that she had begun using the A-scope machine to
determine fetal position (by locating the head) in cases where it was difficult to palpate (e.g.
those perennial cases of obesity).78 Thus where initially the scanner was used only to
confirm pregnancy, Donald now began to use the information from the fetal head to
determine its position in the uterus. Again, what needs to be underlined here is the chance
nature of the emergence of this practice. The team were not initially interested in
determining fetal positions but once they realised this could be done, attention was then
focused in that direction and the possible benefits it may have for clinical diagnoses and
medical management were investigated. Here therefore, it is almost as if the equipment
revealed one of its potentials to them, and, in response, they altered the direction of their
research to accommodate this: the dialectics in this case worked, initially, from the material
to the social, rather than vice versa.
This widening of the technology's uses to include obstetric cases, and the fact that it began
to be used to detect fetal position (rather than pathology), brought the issues of the
technology's safety and potential hazard more clearly to the fore. Indeed, given the
publication, in 1956, of Alice Stewart's influential work on the association between
exposure to x-rays in utero and childhood leukaemia, 79 one might expect to observe a
higher degree of caution in the way the technology was introduced in obstetrics. While this
might be anticipated to have been the case with any new and innovative medical technology
being applied to pregnant women at this time, ultrasound's similarity to x-rays - in that both
were medical imaging devices - undoubtedly increased the need for such caution. While
ultrasound was not a form of ionising radiation, it nevertheless introduced a foreign form of
energy (pulses of ultrasonic sound) into the pregnant uterus. According to Tom Brown,
77 Miss Marr later became Matron at the Queen Mother's Hospital.
78 Donald, I., (1974), 'Sonar - the story of an experiment' p.112.
79 Stewart, A., Webb, 1., Giles, D., Hewett, D., (1956), 'Malignant disease on childhood and diagnostic
irradiation in utero' Lancet, Vol. 2, p.447. See also Greene, G., (1999), The ,,,oman who knew too much: Alice
Stewart and the secrets a/radiation, University of Michigan Press, Michigan.
57
concerns over safety did directly influence the team's decision to concentrate their attentions
at the outset on gynaecology rather than obstetrics.8o
Furthermore, the Glasgow team were
aware of the use ofpower ultrasound in therapeutic applications, and thus knew that
ultrasound energy could cause biological effects. Nevertheless, in their view, the type of
equipment being used was unlikely to have any damaging effects as long as the intensity of
ultrasound being emitted was kept to a minimum. Thus, in his modifications to both the A-
scope and the bed table B-scanner, Brown took the initiative to operate using weak power
output and high amplification to generate images. Furthermore, the Lancet publication in
1958 includes the results of an experiment carried out by Donald and MacVicar to test the
safety of the procedure.81
The brains of kittens were exposed to ultrasound for an hour with
no obvious changes in tissue structure being observed.82
In the context of modern medical practice it may appear shocking that such a highly
experimental procedure was being tested on hospital patients and pregnant women.
Nevertheless, at the time, the actions taken to ensure the technology's safety were, perhaps,
more than adequate. What must be remembered is that flaw-detecting equipment had been
used in industry for over ten years, with no obvious side effects being experienced by those
who used it. Furthermore, during Donald's initial visit to Babcock and Wilcox, he had
observed the way in which the operators calibrated the equipment by testing it on their
thumbs. Thus ultrasound was presented to Donald as a non-hazardous technology. In light
of this, the experiments which were conducted and the decision to operate using a minimum
of power were, in the context of the time, fairly good precautionary measures.
rhe automatic scanner and the 'Sundin' machine
For Tom Brown, the manifest inconsistencies of the bed table scanner were difficult to
assess. As a young, male, medically unqualified engineer, in what he describes as the 'rather
Victorian establishment of the Western Infirmary', he was not permitted to directly operate
80 Tom Brown, interviewed by Ian Spencer, (courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer & Fleming).
81 Donald, I., MacVicar, J. & Brown, T., (1958), 'Investigation of abdominal masses'.
82 The issue of ultrasound's safety continued to be a feature of Donald's work and he carried out a number of
small studies to demonstrate that it was unharmful. For a summary of these experiments see Donald, I., (1976),
'The biological effects of ultrasound'.
58
the hand-guided scanner on patients.83
For this reason, he was somewhat frustrated by the
lack of consistency in that he had no way of determining whether it was due to the machine
itself or to the human operator. In his terms, he was unable to 'take control of the
examination conditions' .84 Thus, for Brown, the main ambition which underpinned the
development of the next prototype (the automatic scanner) was to ensure that he could
control directly the conditions of its use.
Donald, however, recalls events somewhat differently. For him, it was the clinical
experiments which he and MacVicar were doing in an attempt to image hydatidiform
moles85
(which involved increasing the gain - or amplification - of the signals) that led to
the development ofthe automatic machine:
With high gain settings we were confronted with the danger of
being deceived by 'electronic grass'. This danger now seemed
so great that we decided to eliminate at least this error from
over amplification and observer error by having an automatic
scanner which would operate at a completely standardised
speed.86
Again, these two explanations for the evolution of the automatic machine demonstrate the
differences between the view of the engineer and that of the clinician. Brown's frustrations
over 'examination conditions' lie at the heart of his account and are thus, again, shaped by
his position as an engineer working in a clinical field. Donald on the other hand is led to his
assessment of the problems associated with the bed table machine by his clinical experience
of its use. Nevertheless, the heterogeneity of the activities of both actors is also clearly
evident. While Brown is in part speaking of a need to facilitate consistent and dependable
diagnoses, Donald sounds less like a clinician and more like a clinician-engineer!
The net result was nevertheless the same and in 1958 Brown and his colleagues at Kelvin
83 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'Development of ultrasonic scanning' p.ll.
84 ibid. It is also very telling that Brown claims to have deliberately omitted to put identifying labels on any of
the electronic controls, so that he would have to be present whenever the prototype scanner was used.
8'; A hydatidiform mole is produced through the abnormal development of a fertilized ovum, and consists of a
mas~ of cysts found within the uterus. Walton, J., Beeson, P.B. & Scott, R.B., (eds.), (1986), The Oxford
companion to medicine volume J, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
86 Donald, 1., (1974), 'Sonar - the story of an experiment' p.113.
59
Hughes started work on the automatic scanner. This machine was an extremely complex
affair involving, amongst other things, motors, pressure sensing switches and an over-bed
gantry. The probe itself was mounted in a steel ball- similar in appearance to a steel soap
dispenser. That was then connected to a column suspended from a gantry. Through a series
of cranks the steel ball containing the probe rocked to and fro. When it was 30 from the
perpendicular to the skin (sensed by what Brown describes as 'rather indelicate looking
projections on either side ofthe ball,87) the motion was reversed and, simultaneously, the
gantry supporting the column itself moved about 15mm, and the process was repeated. The
fact that the probe was supported by a gantry, rather than a bed table, meant that scans could
be done in the longitudinal plane - i.e. up or down the abdomen lengthways, rather than
only across the width.
Figure 1.3: Professor Donald and Dr. MacVicar (in the background) using the automatic scanner.
(Photograph courtesy of the BMUS Historical Collection.) NB: Donald is setting the position of the probe
using the joystick. The probe itself can be seen in the bottom left corner.
Complicated though this sounds, Brown added further complexity to the machine in an
attempt to accommodate the variety of shapes and sizes of the female body. It has to be
borne in mind that the body surface being imaged (the female abdomen) is a convex one.
Furthermore many of the patient's to be scanned had swollen abdomens, either as a result of
some form of pathology, or because they were pregnant, or because they were simply large
87 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'The development of ultrasonic scanning' p.ll.
60
women. The machine therefore had to be able to remain in contact with body surfaces of
considerable variety. One way in which Brown accommodated this was through another
motor which could drive the probe up or down as required. This coupled with a pressure
sensitive switch, allowed the probe to stay in constant contact with the skin - however its
surface might vary. Thus, the automatic scanner had two separate motors, one which
operated in the horizontal plane, and one in the vertical. However, in order to operate on
'the steep flanks of often rather rotund ladies,88, the scanner had to be able to sense whether
the next movement required had to be horizontal (with sensitivity controlled in the vertical
plane) or vertical. Thus, an elaborate switch over mechanism was designed to enable the
machine to switch backwards and forwards between the two motors.
The final touch was a joystick. This was the only manual part of the actual scan itself and
was used to position the probe at the start of the scan.89 The 'auto' button was then pressed
and the machine took over. When the scan was complete, the machine automatically
switched itself off and a bell would ring to summon the operator. The whole process would
take between 60 and 90 seconds.
What is remarkable about this scanner is that it was used fairly regularly for around six years
to scan thousands of patients with what was generally regarded as a fairly high degree of
consistency, and yet it is the only automatic machine ever built. This prototype never made
it into production, and the team switched to a manually operated design for their next
prototype. While it might be tempting to explain this in terms of professional, clinical
resistance to an automatically operated machine (which would, as intended, lessen the
significance and control of the human operator) it is clear that there were other contributing
factors at work here. Firstly, with so many moving parts and valve-based electronic circuits,
the machine was prone to breaking down, involving much 'tweaking' to get it working
again. However, part of the reason, also lies in the team's need for funding, the complicated
financial scrabbling they were doing, and the financial problems which were beginning to
affect their main sponsor - Kelvin Hughes Ltd.
88 ibid.
89 It is tempting to interpret the fact that this was done by joystick, rather than by directly moving the probe, as
another demonstration of Brown's desire to make sure it was something he himself could do, i.e., it did not
require the operator to touch the patient. However, the mechanics of the operation ofthis machine entail that
there is also a material basis to the need for a joystick.
61
It seems clear that, despite the fact that much of this work was 'funded' by Kelvin Hughes,
the Chairman and most of the Board were not aware of their support for medical ultrasonics.
Brown's 'scrounging' and 'borrowing' was supplemented by the subversive tactics of the
deputy Chairman of Kelvin Hughes, William Slater. According to Brown, Slater fed
whatever money he could 'acquire' to the team and, at times, hid the whole project from the
rest of the board. It was also Slater who facilitated the services of Brown to the Glasgow
team on a regular basis and donated the 500 of company funds for the development of the
bed table scanner.
Donald himself, however, was not averse to a little underhand wheeling and dealing. In
1959, for example, he hired the services of Tom Duggan, a physicist, to work on the
ultrasound project. However, Duggan's salary was derived from a grant Donald received
from the Scottish Hospital Endowment Research Trust for a study of neonatal respiration.
This grant was awarded with the specific instruction that it was not to be used for
ultrasound.9o
The early years, therefore, were characterised by these unofficial arrangements.
It must of course be remembered that with the exception of Duggan none of the team were
working on ultrasound on a full-time basis. Donald and MacVicar had their other clinical
duties, while Brown was still working for other projects at Kelvin Hughes's factory.
Nevertheless, this was a large-scale research project which lacked a properly defined
funding programme. Things, however, were set to get still worse.
In December of 1959, Donald was called to see William Slater at the Kelvin Hughes factory.
The original 500 Slater had given to the project had by this time stretched into several
thousand pounds, and the company could no longer afford to help fund the project. At this
time, Kelvin Hughes were beginning to have larger concerns to worry about which -
ironically - were partly attributable to the automatic flaw detectors which Brown had helped
devise in the early 1950s. While these were being redesigned at the company's main factory
site in Barkingside, London, they were vigorously marketed all over Britain. Despite a large
~o McNay, M.B. & Fleming, lE.E., (1999), 'Forty years of obstetric ultrasound' p.! O.
62
number of models being sold, few were actually being delivered and orders were beginning
to back up. Problems with the design were also delaying the process.91
This meant, however, that Donald had problems of his own in funding the continued
development of the automatic scanner. In solving these, Donald behaved very much in the
role of 'systems builder' or 'engineer-entrepreneur' described by Thomas Hughes -
networking and using the many contacts he had to save his project.92
Donald's first stop was
to the office of the Principal of Glasgow University, Sir Hector Hetherington.93
From
Hetherington he received 750, but he was also advised by the elderly Principal to approach
the Advisory Committee of Medical Research and, again, the Scottish Hospital Endowments
Research Trust. Following a 'lunch party' which Donald attended with
William Slater from Kelvin Hughes, the Chairman of the Trust sanctioned a grant of 4,000.
This was later supplemented after Donald's visit to London, where he worked his charm on
the National Research Development Corporation, gaining an immediate 4,000, and a total
of 10,000 over the next few years. 1960, in other words brought a greater degree of
financial security to the project, which would last until at least 1965.
In Donald's search for funding at this time, it is important to note not only his networking
skills but also the more personal qualities attributed to him. Virtually all interviewees who
knew or encountered Donald, describe him as a very strong character - enthusiastic,
motivational, occasionally strict, but above all, charismatic. He was also a tall man with that
intangible quality known as 'presence' .94 Furthermore, in the very traditional and class-
ridden world of medicine in the 1950s and '60s, Donald was certainly one of the club.
Professor at a prestigious university, he possessed not only the appropriate medical skills of
his profession, but also the more unofficial 'character' and background of a man of his
position. These personal characteristics were undoubtedly put to good use at times such as
these.
91 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'The development of ultrasonic scanning'.
92 Hughes, T.P., (1999), 'Edison and electric light'.
93 Donald, I., (1974), 'Sonar - the story of an experiment' p. 112.
94 For an attempt to integrate such characteristics into the sociology of science see Thorpe, C. & Shapin, S.,
(2000), 'Who was Robert 1. Oppenheimer? Charisma and social organisation' Social studies ofscience, Vol.
30, No.4, pp. 545-90.
63
What is also important about Donald's activities here is that they demonstrate the
interconnection between innovation and diffusion - even at this very early stage of
development. What Donald was doing was 'selling' his machine - or at least its potential,
the promise it represented. Selling medical ultrasound to committees and bodies who could
fund its development was essentially an exercise in diffusion of the idea of ultrasound. The
team had already published evidence of its potential - this was simply another way of
spreading the message. Furthermore, Donald at around this time embarked on a series of
lectures in the US - again spreading the word about medical sonar. Brown also played his
part in this respect. In 1960, he took the finished automatic scanner to London, to show it at
Olympia.95
These activities were as crucial as those occurring in the Glasgow factory and in
the hospital, and indeed they were all interwoven. Both the clinical and technical
developments in Glasgow were dependent on funds and therefore interest if they were to
continue. Similarly, Donald would have nothing to 'sell' without the activities going on at
home. Thus the innovation and diffusion of the early scanner was the emergent outcome of a
whole host of activities in a variety ofcontexts and locations.
Donald also had one other source of income for the project. Around this same time a young
Swedish obstetrician, Dr. Bertil Sunden, visited Glasgow on a quest to find a suitable
research topic for his MD thesis. His interest aroused by the Glasgow research into
ultrasound, Sunden decided to reproduce Donald's work - in other words, to verify his
findings. Despite the fact that the automatic scanner was almost complete, Sunden wanted
an exact copy of the machine which Donald had used to produce his first publications - i.e.
the bed-table scanner - and offered to pay whatever was required.96
What Sunden eventually
got, almost two years later, and at a cost of around 2,500 was a hybrid between the
manually operated bed-table machine and the automatic scanner. In other words, Sunden's
money was used to build yet another prototype - which would become the basic model for
the Diasonograph, the first commercially manufactured machine.
95 Indeed, Donald makes reference to the fact that on this occasion Brown 'demonstrated his ability as a
showman' (Donald, I., (1974), 'Sonar - the story of an experiment' p.114).
96 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'The development of ultrasonic scanning;' Donald,!., (1974), 'Sonar - the
story of an experiment'. See also Blume, S.S., (1992), Insight and industlY; Fleming, lE. & McNay, M.B.,
(\999), 'Forty years of obstetric ultrasound'.
64
Figure 1.4: The Sunden machine
(Photograph courtesy of the BMUS Historical Collection.)
The early 1960s therefore, saw the ultrasound project gain increasing momentum. This was
further compounded in 1962, when Kelvin Hughes merged with Smith's Industries, an
English based manufacturing firm. The resources which Smith's could muster added
increased financial support. The team itself was also expanding: Brown and his colleagues
at Smith's/Kelvin Hughes continued to work on the construction of the equipment, while
Donald and MacVicar, now joined by James Willocks worked on clinical applications and
Tom Duggan collaborated with Willocks on the development of electronic cursors for
measuring fetal bi-parietal diameter (BPD). In 1962, their number expanded still further
when John Fleming, a 28 year old electrical engineer, was appointed by Smith's as a Project
Engineer for the Diasonograph.97
Furthermore, the diversity of the group's activities (evident almost since the start of the
project), was further compounded by the number of models they now had available for use.
Willocks and Duggan worked with the A-scope machine in their analysis of fetal
measurements at the Royal Maternity Hospital; Donald and MacVicar continued to
investigate a series of gynaecological and obstetrical conditions using both A-scope and B-
97 Interview with John Fleming, September 1998.
65
scanner models.
In 1961, Sunden at long last received his newly re-designed ultrasound machine - making
him the first customer of contact B-scan equipment - and set about reproducing Donald's
work in Lund, Sweden.98
There were, however, 'teething problems' associated with the
purchase of a prototype, and one of John Fleming's first tasks on arriving in his new post in
1962 was to fly to Sweden to fix Sunden's machine.99
Overall, much of this period was
devoted to refining the scanner's design for commercial production. Fleming worked on the
electronic circuits, Brown on the mechanical aspects and Dugald Cameron (then an
Industrial Design student at Glasgow School of Art and later Principal of that institution)
was engaged to develop the aesthetics ofthe machine. The end product - the Smith's
Industries'Diasonograph' went into commercial production in 1963, and in 1964 the first
model was delivered to the soon-to-open Queen Mother's Maternity Hospital, in Yorkhill
Glasgow.
Conclusions
In this chapter, the early development of medical ultrasound in Glasgow, which led to the
production of the first medical scanner for use in obstetrics, has been examined. Throughout
these developments it is clear that the research project on medical ultrasound was a
collaborative one. Clinicians and engineers learned to move in each other's spheres, to
understand each other's language and practices. Furthermore, their interaction with
ultrasound led to the development of whole new forms of practice and language. In other
words, in the wards of the Western Infirmary and the Royal Maternity Hospital, and in the
factory of Kelvin Hughes, a new specialist area of practice and knowledge was beginning to
emerge. Not only was this an extension of the existing cultures of engineering and medicine,
it was also crucially a hybridisation between the two. The emergence of medical ultrasound
brought together two separate communities of actors and forms of expertise.
98 Sunden, B., (1964), 'On the diagnostic value of ultrasound in obstetrics and gynaecology' Acta obstetrica et
gynaec%gica Scandinffi1ica, Vo!. 43, (supp!. 6).
99 Interview with John Fleming, September 1998.
66
Furthermore, the activities of the actors involved can be characterised as a form of
'heterogeneous engineering' .100 In bringing together metal flaw detectors and female bodies
in the emergence of a new technology, the actors played out multiple roles and interacted
with a variety of material and social circumstances. It was as a result of all of these
heterogeneous activities and interactions that ultrasound emerged in the form that it did.
These activities were interwoven with one another. Sometimes the interactions in which
Brown was engaged diverged from those of Donald and MacVicar, while at other times they
converged and overlapped. Thus the interactions between the clinicians and the engineer are
characteristic of John Law's conception of 'heterogeneous engineers' and Thomas Hughes'
'systems builders' .10
1
In addition, the actors' interactions with ultrasound itself present an example of Andy
Pickering's 'dance of agency'.102 Brown's activities, for example, in designing his various
prototypes demonstrate the fundamental characteristics of human interaction with the
material world. From probe design, to image display, to contact method and image
recording, Brown 'tinkered' with and 'tuned' his machines. His activities were mirrored by
the performance of the equipment. When a change was made, he would wait and see how it
affected overall performance then would act again to make further changes. Thus, in
Pickering's sense, his human agency was engaged in an interactive, dialectic relationship
with the material agency of the sound waves, electronics, mechanical design, etc of the
machine. However, at other times, both Brown and Donald interacted in different arenas-
in their promotional activities to 'sell' their machine, or with one another to communicate in
the hybrid they were creating between their two scientific cultures. The underlying point is
that these activities were heterogeneous and it was the particularities of this heterogeneity
that co-produced the technology and shaped its form.
What has also been emphasised in this account is the unpredictable nature of the
development of ultrasound. Any overly deterministic account of the emergence of this
technology (from either a technical or social perspective) would downplay - or ignore - the
100 Law, 1., (1991), 'Introduction: monsters, machines;' idem, (1987), 'Technology and heterogeneous
engineering' .
101 Hughes, T.P., (1999), 'Edison and electric light'.
102 Pickering, A., (1995), The mangle ofpractice.
67
importance of chance, luck, and accident. This story is riddled with such events from the
first experiment at Babcock and Wilcox, to the eventual design of the Diasonograph. To
ignore them would diminish the capacity to account for technological changes of this sort.
This chapter, therefore, has traced what is traditionally regarded as the 'innovation' stage of
technological development from the building of prototypes to the construction ofa
commercial machine. Nevertheless, it is clear that even while prototypes were being
developed and research into possible applications was being conducted, some forms of
diffusion were already taking place. In their publications, in Donald's lecture tours, in their
demonstrations of the machine to visiting medics such as Sunden and even in their
negotiations with funding bodies, Donald and his team of co-workers were already diffusing
the 'idea' of ultrasound and its potential. They were, in other words, already active in
constructing a market for the technology. Thus even before the first machines were actually
manufactured, sold and installed in new locations, medical ultrasound had already embarked
upon the road of diffusion. Nevertheless, all oftheir activities were inter-related and co-
dependant. It thus seems foolhardy to attempt to allocate 'innovation' and 'diffusion' to two
separate stages of development in a way which would obscure the heterogeneity of activities
of both kinds which are evident here. Furthermore, as will be outlined in Chapter 2, the
diffusion of the Diasonograph as an artifact, and of obstetric ultrasound as a technology, in
terms of its introduction into new locations, did not signal the end of innovation, but merely
a change in its nature.
68
Chapter 2
'Enrolment': the early career of contact B-scanning in
Scotland
69
Introduction
The preceding chapter outlined some ofthe activities involved in the early innovation of
diagnostic ultrasound in Glasgow, leading to the construction of the Smith's Diasonograph.
However, as Ruth Schwartz Cowan has noted with reference to technological development
in the United States:
If the landscape of American social history is cluttered with the
remains of failed communes and cooperatives, the landscape of
American technical history is littered with the remains of abandoned
machines. I
British technical history is no less cluttered with prototypes that never made their way into
production, or with commercial machines which did not sell. Thus the launch of the Smith's
Diasonograph as a factory produced commodity did not, in itself, indicate the commercial
'success' of medical ultrasound. Its fate would instead be determined by the extent of its
uptake and use by other actors in other locations. In other words, medical ultrasound needed
to have a market - a set of actors willing to purchase the technology and use it in clinical
practice. In this chapter the emergence of this market will be examined by an exploration of
the uptake of obstetric ultrasound in Scotland during the 1960s and early 1970s.
Three related developments in particular characterise this period in the teclmology's history.
Firstly, the 1960s marks the technology's 'coming of age' in both a commercial and clinical
sense. The commercial production ofDiasonograph machines (first by Smith's Industries
and, later, by Nuclear Enterprises Ltd.) facilitated their wider uptake in other locations. In
addition, other medical equipment manufacturers from mainland Europe (Siemens of
Germany and Kretztechik of Austria) began to produce machines for use in obstetrics.
While these manufacturers did not make a significant impact in Scotland (in terms of the
number of machines adopted in Scottish hospitals, in comparison to the Diasonograph
design) the increased commercial interest in obstetric ultrasound does provide evidence that
the technology itself was gaining in prominence. Interwoven with these commercial
developments, this period also saw the technology become established as a diagnostic tool
J Schwartz Cowan, R., (1985), 'How the refrigerator got its hum' in MacKenzie, D. & Wajcman, J., (eds.), The
social shaping oftechnology: how the reji'igerator got its hUI11, Open UP, Milton Keynes, p.202.
70
in obstetric medicine. The number of conditions and pathologies which ultrasound could
help diagnose increased while, simultaneously, it began to be used on a more regular basis.
Secondly, this period saw the emergence of what could be described as an 'ultrasound
community' in Scotland: a set of workers scattered across the country whose activities in a
variety of spheres fostered and developed the emergent technology. The early members of
this community were those largely responsible for the technology's initial diffusion - actors
who came into contact with the technology (or with Ian Donald's enthusiasm for it) and who
were inspired to lobby their own institutions for the funds to purchase a machine, or junior
doctors trained by Donald and the team to use the technology while resident at one of the
Glasgow hospitals, and who subsequently took up employment elsewhere. On the other
hand, there were also those whose entry into this community was a consequence of
ultrasound's diffusion - those who were drawn into the technology because of the specialist
skills they possessed (in, for example, engineering or medical physics) when a new
institution acquired a machine and sought help in the construction of a working service.
Thus, the emergence of this community was interwoven with the technology's diffusion,
being both shaped by the spread of the technology to new areas, while also helping to foster
this. Furthermore, the importance of this emergent community highlights that ultrasound's
diffusion was not simply about the movement or spread of artifacts, but was also crucially
related to the movement of actors with the knowledge and skills associated with the
technology.
The final development which characterised this period in the history of ultrasound was its
growing significance as an obstetric tool. Indeed, despite the fact that Donald's first
investigations were in gynaecological cases, and that the Diasonograph had been designed
for use in general abdominal examinations, it was primarily within obstetric medicine that
ultrasound achieved its first commercial 'success' in terms of its diffusion to other areas.
The aim of this chapter is to map out these developments by examining the 'career' of the
Scottish-designed Diasonograph within obstetrics throughout the 1960s and early 1970s.
Much of the secondary literature on the development of diagnostic ultrasound has focussed
on the nature of the social and professional relations between different sets of professional
actors, or between the medical profession and the patient population. Ann Oakley, for
71
example, explains the success of obstetric ultrasound in terms of the medical profession's
desire to capture control over pregnancy from pregnant women themselves? Obstetric
ultrasound, according to Oakley, enabled clinicians to peer directly into the pregnant uterus
and thus obtain information about pregnancy in a way that allowed them to by-pass the
women involved. This, she argues, was a powerful motive for both the innovation and
diffusion ofthe technology. Ellen Koch, on the other hand, concentrates on inter-
professional comparisons in her study of the early work of Howry and Bliss on the one hand
and Wild and Reid on the other, comparing the two groups of actors in terms of the different
cultures of radiology and surgery.3 From this, she argues that their respective specialist
interests led them to pursue the development of ultrasound imaging in different ways.
Howry (the radiologist) sought a technology to complement x-rays and one that would
display a full map or topography of internal tissues and structures, while Wild (the surgeon)
sought to immediately differentiate between malignancy and normal pathology. Similarly,
Edward Yoxen explains the relative success and failure of groups of medical ultrasound
innovators in terms ofthe nature oftheir adherence to professional socialisation.4
For
Yoxen, those actors who drew on their professional training and background as a resource
(rather than a rigid determinant of activity) were able to approach innovation with greater
flexibility. In tum, flexibility in interpreting professional background allowed the
development of a 'technological frame' that encompassed the training of other actors.
While such approaches have produced some valuable insights into the study of ultrasound's
development, they tend to suffer from an over dependence on a single explanatory variable:
i.e. specialist interest. However, the very notion of a set (or sets) of actors with pre-existing
interests in relation to a new technology is an assumption which is, itself, open to challenge.
For example, in her detailed study of the development of x-ray diagnosis, Bemike Pasveer
2 Oakley, A., (1984), The captured womb, Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
3 Koch, E.B., (1993), 'In the image of science? Negotiating the development of diagnostic ultrasound in the
cultures of surgery and radiology' Technology and Culture, Vol. 34, pp. 858-893; idem, (1990), 'The process
of innovation in medical technology: American research on ultrasound, 1947 to 1962' PhD thesis, (University
of Pennsylvania). See also Blume, S.S., (1992), Insight and industfY: on the dynamics oftechnological change
in medicine,MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
4 Yoxen, E., (1987), 'Seeing with sound: a study ofthe development of medical images' in Bijker, W.E.,
Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, T.J., (eds.), The social construction oftechnological systems: new directions in the
sociology oftechnology, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass., pp. 281-303.
72
questions the prior existence of such interests.
s
Her account of this technology traces the co-
development of technical artifact, technique and professional hierarchy in the co-
construction of the medical specialty of radiology. For Pasveer, the organisation and
differentiation of different sets of actors (such as the emergence of a two-tier medical
hierarchy of 'radiographers' and 'radiologists') were themselves the emergent outcome of
the technology's development. In other words, 'specialist interests' did not exist a priori -
suspended in some form of 'social limbo' - and for this reason the idea of stable social
contexts which can be used to explain technological development is too simplistic. That is
not to argue that social interests cannot and do not influence technological development and
change, but simply to suggest that they themselves do not remain static or unchanged.
Social interests such as those associated with specific medical specialties are as adaptable
and malleable as technical artifacts and forms of practice - no more so, but also no less so.
In Insight and IndustlY, Stuart Blume traces out a more useful model of the way in which
specialist medical interests influenced the development of diagnostic ultrasound.6
Using a
hybrid analytical account that looks simultaneously at organisational, social,
epistemological and economic factors, he attempts to trace the comparative successes and
failures of various ventures in diagnostic ultrasound in an international perspective. His
account is also strengthened through a close examination of medicallindustrial
interconnections and relationships.
Blume compares the interests and activities of a number of medical specialties that
investigated the clinical potential of ultrasound in their disciplines including cardiology,
neurology, ophthalmology as well as obstetrics and gynaecology. What is different in
Blume's account is that it explores a number of ways in which specialist interest affected
not only the design of the technology, but also its comparative amenity to commercial
exploitation. For example, Blume notes that research into ultrasound's potential uses within
some specialties entailed only a slight modification to existing flaw detecting equipment in
5 Pasveer, B., (1992), 'Shadows of knowledge, making a representing practice in medicine: x-ray pictures and
pulmonary tuberculosis, 1895-1930' PhD thesis (University of Amsterdam), published by CIP-Gegevens
Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Den Haag; idem, (1990), 'Knowledge of shadows: the introduction of x-ray images in
medicine' Sociology of/walth and illness, Vol. 11, No.4, pp. 360-81
6 Blume, S.S., (1992), insight and industry: on the dynamics oftechnological change il1l11edicine, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass. and London.
73
the form of the A-scope. Thus, at least potentially, existing firms could manufacture medical
ultrasound for these specialties relatively easily. He also notes that such equipment meant
that market entry barriers were significantly lower and thus new, small firms were able to
gain a foothold in emerging markets. On the other hand, he notes that the protracted and
complex nature of the development of abdominal scanners for gynaecological and obstetric
investigations brought with it a much higher degree of investment, research and
development before any commercial returns could be made. Thus (as outlined in Chapter 1)
the degree of redesigning and technological complexity of the Diasonograph made it a
major drain on resources and a long-term financial commitment with, at least initially, little
obvious immediate return on investment.
Furthermore, although he does not pursue this point, within Blume's account it is possible
to spot evidence of material agency playing a role in the differential development of
ultrasound in diverse medical contexts. For example, in ophthalmology a simple 'snap-shot'
picture was all that was required while, at the same time, the area to be imaged was
relatively small. Furthermore, the physical makeup of the structure being imaged (for
example the interference of the skull when imaging the brain, or the very subtle tissue
density changes and lack of standardisation in the female breast) made technological design
much more problematic for some specialties than for others. With obstetrics and
gynaecology, the abdominal area of interest presented problems in terms of its large area
and the number and complexity of organs and tissues present. Indeed, as Blume notes, the
development of ultrasound for gynaecological and obstetric applications was,
comparatively, one of the most protracted and complex: Brown's two-dimensional scanner
was one of the most intricate developments from the original flaw detecting equipment
which most researchers were using. It was not, in other words, simply the questions being
asked of the technology within this medical specialty which accounts for its different
development, but also the precise nature of the bodily parts being imaged: their make-up,
their functioning and their position.
Thus while'specialist interests' did shape the development of the various forms of
diagnostic imaging, this was not done in a simple cause and effect manner. Instead, it was
the interaction between such interests, the equipment being employed and the areas of the
body being imaged which co-constructed new forms of the technology. What will be
74
highlighted in this chapter, however, is that these issues continued to affect the development
of obstetric ultrasound once it had begun to diffuse to other centres. In other words, there is
no simple and straightforward division between 'innovation' and 'diffusion'. The questions
being asked of the technology, the uses to which it was put, and the agency of the bodily
material with which it interacted continued to shape its development as both a research and
clinical tool. At this particular consumptionjunction7
new actors, locations and
circumstances introduced new demands that often required modifications or
accommodations in terms of technical configuration and/or technique. What is significant
about this is that issues and problems that arose with existing design could not have been
predicted or anticipated in advance. Rather, it was users in their daily interactions with the
technology that identified limitations in design, or indeed who redefined the purpose of
certain design features.
Another useful concept which can help clarify this period in the history of obstetric
ultrasound is Bruno Latour's 'emolment,.8 For Latour, the way in which actors come to
support a new scientific idea or practice can be characterised as their emolment into an
actor-network - a set of humani non-human relationships which, taken together, jointly
constitute the technology. Thus the diffusion of obstetric ultrasound could be characterised
as achieved via a process of emolment in terms of the new actors, locations and
circumstances which became associated with the technology. However, as Latour points
out, emolment does not simply mean that actors are enveloped within current practices -
each new set of relationships and circumstances creates new opportunities for innovation in
the nature of the interaction between users and machines. Thus it is not simply 'how' actors
are emolled, but also the nature of their subsequent interaction with the technology which is
important.
This chapter, therefore, will examine the early uses to which obstetric ultrasound scanning
equipment was put. What questions were asked of this equipment and what demands were
7 Schwartz Cowan, R., (1987), 'The consumption junction: a proposal for research strategies in the sociology
of technology' in Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, TJ., (eds.), The social construction o/technological
systems, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp261-280.
8 Latour, B., (1992), 'Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few mundane artifacts' in Bijker,
W.E. & Law, 1., (eds.), Shaping technology/building society: studies in socio-technical change, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass; Latour, B., (1987), Science in action, Open UP, Milton Keynes.
75
placed on it? What expectations were raised by its availability? Also, how exactly was
knowledge about this technology spread from centre to centre and which types of actors
were instrumental in its adoption and use? What will become clear is that in order to
account fully for the initial uptake and use of ultrasound as a commercial technology in
obstetrics, the search for explanation must move beyond simple inter-professional interests.
This chapter will follow both actors and machines and examine not only their activities vis a
vis one another, but also with other actors and other machines.
The commercial suppliers: another change ill ownership
An important factor associated with the early career ofthe Diasonograph lay in the
continuing complexities associated with the commercial side of the endeavour. Smith's
Industries began the manufacture and sale of the Diasonograph in 1963. Three years later,
however, the company withdrew from its activities in Scotland, including the medical
ultrasound project, in response to financial difficulties being faced at the time. Thus Smith's
themselves manufactured very few machines. According to John Fleming, who became
chief engineer on the project following Tom Brown's departure to Honeywell Ltd. in 1965,
Smith's only produced 12 machines commercially. Four of these models were sold to the
Ministry of Health to be investigated for their clinical potential.9
Donald, writing in 1974,
indicates the destination of two of these - to University College Hospital, London and
Bristol.\0 Unfortunately, there appears to be no available written record of the number, or
fate, of the other machines, although one certainly went to the Queen Mother's Hospital and
Fleming recalls another being shipped to Dubai.II
While the mounting cost of the medical ultrasound project undoubtedly contributed to
Smith's financial problems at this time, most of the company's troubles related to a patent
dispute over medical ultrasound rights. In 1958, before Smith's merged with Kelvin
Hughes, patents had been applied for by the latter company in relation to the bed table
scanner. 12 As far as Kelvin Hughes were concerned this patent covered all later forms of
9 Mr. John Fleming, pers comm.
10 Donald, 1., (1974), 'Sonar - the story of an experiment' Ultrasound in medicine and biology, Vol. I, p.115.
II Mr. John Fleming, pel's comm.
12 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'Development of ultrasonic scanning techniques in Scotland, 1956-1979:
personal recollections ofT.G. Brown' (British Medical Ultrasound Society (BMUS) Historical Collection).
76
contact scanning - i.e. scanning in which the probe was applied directly to the body without
the need for the patient to be immersed in water.13 However, American firm Automation
Industries (who worked in association with Floyd Firestone on a similar machine) claimed
that their patent secured the commercial rights to medical contact scanning. This patent
dispute was passed on to Smith's Industries and the associated legal costs proved to be a
major financial drain. It is worth noting that the issue of patents can itself influence the
development oftechnology by encouraging engineers to pursue certain avenues of research
rather than others in an attempt to circumnavigate existing commercial rights and patents. 14
Indeed, according to Tom Brown, his attempts to develop a three-dimensional scanner in the
late 1960s was specifically aimed at avoiding the patent problems associated with two-
dimensional contact scanning. IS In the early 1960s, however, the dispute over commercial
rights affected the development of the technology by forcing Smith's Industries out of the
market altogether.
The company's withdrawal left the project stranded and Donald's greatest fear was that their
work would be taken over by one ofthe large American firms (such as Automation
Industries) now showing an interest in medical imaging. Again Donald's willingness to
operate in multiple arenas is evident in the various ways in which he attempted to save his
research:
Once again, I hied me to the Principal of Glasgow University, now Sir
Charles Wilson, simply to ask the right to engage electronic engineers
on a fee-for-service basis to keep my apparatus on its feet and working.
Hawking the project around a variety of firms had produced no
tangible results, only polite refusal to burn their fingers as Smiths and
Kelvin Hughes before them had done.16
In the end, it was Nuclear Enterprises Ltd., an Edinburgh-based engineering firm involved
with the very prestigious and burgeoning area of nuclear technology, which took over the
13 ibid.
14 A number of examples of the importance of patents for technological innovation can be found in accounts of
the work of A.D. Blumlein, the inventor ofphonic recording, or sound reproduction. See Alexander, R.C.,
(1999), The inventor ofstereo: the life and works ofAlan Dower Blumlein, Focal Press, Oxford; Burns, R.,
(2000), The life and times ofA.D. Blumlein, Institution of Electrical Engineers in association with the Science
Museum, London.
15 Brown, T., (unpublished paper), Development of ultrasonic scanning'.
16 Donald, 1., (1974), 'Sonar - the story of an experiment' p.117.
77
commercial interests of the Smith's medical ultrasound project. It is here, however, that
events became somewhat more complex. Firstly, the changeover from Smiths to Nuclear
Enterprises split the Glasgow team. Donald's interview with the Principal of the University
was more successful than he had hoped. The University facilitated the establishment of a
University Department of Ultrasonic Technology whose role was both to continue to
maintain the existing equipment and to undertake further research and development. Based
at the Queen Mother's Hospital (and thus from the outset more associated with obstetric
medicine than other abdominal applications) the new Department was operated by two
engineers from the ultrasound team - John Fleming and Angus Hall. Brian Fraser, however,
(and Tom Brown, who returned to the project for a short while) transferred to Nuclear
Enterprises to work on the further commercial development of medical ultrasound.
Research and development activities were therefore divided not only in terms of geography,
but also in terms of focus. At Nuclear Enterprises in Edinburgh Fraser and Brown worked
exclusively on technical development, while the Glasgow team's research focussed on
clinical applications. Thus the inter-related engineering and clinical dimensions of
ultrasound which so characterised the original team's work in the late 1950s and early 1960s
became much more sharply delineated. However, the actors continued to interact with one
another and, with Glasgow University directly employing two engineers to work on the
development of medical ultrasound, the Glasgow group's activities do not appear to have
been adversely affected by the new arrangements. John Fleming, for example, recalls that
improvements which were made to the technology at the Queen Mother's were diffused to
Nuclear Enterprises, while new prototypes from Edinburgh were often loaned to Donald and
his colleagues to be tried out in practice. 17
Having taken over Smiths interests, including the company's stock, Nuclear Enterprises
continued to manufacture the original Smith's design, which they renamed the NE4101.
Later models which incorporated major technical developments, such as solid-based
transistor technology (as opposed to the valve technology of the Smiths' machines) and
grey-scale imaging (which enabled tissue texture to be viewed) were given similar names -
in these cases the NE41 02 and NE4200, respectively. Such technical-sounding
nomenclature can be viewed as an attempt to convey meanings associated with technical
17 Interview with Mr. John Fleming, 20/09/98.
78
sophistication which is itself indicative of the general importance and authority accorded to
science and technology within medicine in the late twentieth century. Nuclear Enterprises,
as a company associated with the cutting edge frontier of nuclear technology and its
translation into medicine were, arguably, more in touch with the rhetorical power of science
and technology than Smiths had been, and thus more inclined to take every opportunity to
use that rhetoric to their advantage. In addition, (as the Microsoft Corporation has clearly
demonstrated in the computer software market) the use of numbers can act as a powerful
marketing ploy, with a change in number clearly signalling that the model has been
somehow 'updated'. Whether or not this strategy worked for Nuclear Enterprises is hard to
determine as, in Scotland, its prominence in the field undoubtedly owed much to the work
of Ian Donald and his co-workers in Glasgow. Nevertheless, despite these name changes, in
common parlance all of these machines continued to be known under what had now become
the generic term of 'Diasonograph' (later they were occasionally also referred to as
'Dinosaurographs' or 'Brontosaurographs' due to their size and bulk). Nevertheless, what is
important is that when ultrasound first began to spread to other locations in Scotland, it was
Nuclear Enterprises who benefited from the financial returns that accrued.
Research into obstetric applications in Glasgow
In 1964, with the opening of the Queen Mother's Hospital (QMH), Ian Donald's obstetric
wards moved from the Royal Maternity Hospital on the south side of the city, to their new
West End location, opposite the Western Infirmary. The construction of this new hospital
itself was a feat in which Donald was intimately involved. He lobbied the Hospital Board
and the university with the need for its creation but, more significantly, was instrumental in
its very design. As a former colleague, Mr. Wallace Barr recalls:
He went to the Principal and arranged that the University would
provide so much money and then he went to the Hospital Board, they
got so much money and virtually planned the place himself. He pored
over these plans... and they incorporated several ideas into the building
of the hospital. 18
18 Mr Wallace Barr, interviewed by Ian Spencer, 30104/96 (courtesy of Nicolson, Spencer and Fleming).
79
One of these 'ideas', for example, was for the labour ward to have separate rooms for each
woman, rather than large wards with screens to act as dividers. 19 This was radically different
from the traditional layout of maternity hospitals. His influence however could also be seen
in the more mundane and practical aspects of hospital management. In the canteen, for
instance, there was no separate 'doctors' mess' to reinforce the distinction and hierarchy of
hospital life. Donald, it would seem, did not approve of such affectations.20
Even the
hospital's name was chosen by Donald, who was a great admirer of Queen Elizabeth, the
Queen Mother?1
More significantly, Donald's influence on the design of the new hospital meant that it was
the first medical establishment to have a dedicated, purpose-designed, ultrasound
examination room. This room was designed to accommodate the machine (requiring a floor
strong enough to bear the weight of the one tonne gantry), and enough space to enable
patients to be wheeled into the room on trolleys, and doctors and technicians to move freely
around). A water supply was also installed for the removal of the messy contact gel, while a
small reception and waiting area were included, adjacent to the main scan room. The
requirements of ultrasound diagnosis were thus built into the very fabric of the hospital.
Prior to the official opening of the hospital, a Smith's Industries Diasonograph, the very first
production model to be made, was installed in its new home at the Queen Mother's.
Thus the number of hospitals operating the technology in Glasgow expanded to three - the
Western Infirmary, the Royal Maternity Hospital at Rottenrow and the Queen Mother's
itself. At the Western, gynaecological conditions continued to be examined using
ultrasound. However, in the hands of the hospital's Consultant Radiologists, Ellis Barnett
and Patricia Morley, new areas of investigation were pursued, including differential
19 Indeed, the labour rooms designed at Donald's request so accurately reflected the nature of obstetric practice
in the 1960s that by the 1980s they were too small to accommodate the proliferating number of technologies
and 3ttendants associated with childbirth during later decades. (Dr Malcolm Nicolson, pel's cOl/un.)
20 Mr Wallace Barr, interviewed by Ian Spencer, 30/04/96 (courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer and Fleming).
21 ibid.
80
ultrasound diagnosis of pathologies of the urinary tract.22 In the Queen Mother's, however,
the focus was on obstetrics and Donald began to pursue new avenues of clinical use.
As noted in Chapter 1, investigations into ultrasonic diagnosis during pregnancy were
already underway prior to 1964. Donald and MacVicar began to consider pregnancy in the
late 1950s - looking first of all at the differential diagnosis of pregnancy from clinical,
pathological conditions before turning their attentions to complications in early pregnancy
such as hydatidiform mole.23 This work was extended by Willocks and Duggan's
investigations into the use ofthe modified A-scope to map fetal maturity via measurements
ofbi-parietal diameter (BPD).24 In late 1963 however, a chance observation was made
which would help spur the clinical investigation of the pregnant uterus and its contents via
ultrasound. 25 One woman who had been kept waiting for her ultrasound examination
presented with a full bladder. Donald discovered that the presence of a large quantity of
urine in the bladder meant that the intestine and bowel were displaced slightly, allowing a
clear view of the uterus through the ready-made liquid sounding tank of urine. The
significance of this lay in the fact that prior to this point, ultrasonic imaging ofthe uterus
22 Dr Ellis Barnett became involved in ultrasound imaging in the late 1950s, when he became acquainted with
Donald's work in the Western Infirmary. Following the relocation of Donald's obstetric wards to the Queen
Mother's Hospital, Barnett continued to operate obstetric ultrasound at the Royal Maternity Hospital at
Rottenrow, and for gynaecology patients at the Western. From the mid 1960s, however, and in collaboration
with his radiology colleague, Dr Patricia Morley, he began investigating ultrasound's uses for other abdominal
Rpplications including the kidney, liver and gallbladder. (Interview with Dr Ellis Barnett, 27/08/99). Their
early publications include Barnett, E., (1972), 'Ultrasound in abdominal conditions' Radiography, Vol. 38,
No. 453, pp.233-41; Barnett, E. & Morley, P., (1971), 'Ultrasound in the investigation of space-occupying
lesions of the urinary tract'Britishjollrnal o/radiology, Vol. 44, No. 526, pp.733-42; idem., (1972),
'Diagnostic ultrasound in renal disease' British medical bulletin, Vol. 28, No.3, pp.196-9; Morley, P., Barnett,
E., Bell, P.R., Briggs, I.K., CaIman, K.C., Hamilton, D.N. & Paton, A.M., (1975), 'Ultrasound in the diagnosis
of fluid collections following renal transplantation' Clinical radiology, Vol. 26, No.2, pp.199-207; Davidson,
1.K., Morley, P., Hurley, G.D. & Holford, N.G., (1975), 'Adrenal venography and ultrasound in the
investigation of the adrenal gland: an analysis of 58 cases' Britishjournal o/radiology, Vol. 48, No. 570,
pp.435-50; Kyle, K.F., Deane, R.F., Morley, P. & Barnett, E., (1971), 'Ultrasonography of the urinary tract'
Britishjournalo/urology, Vol. 43, No.6, pp.709-17.
23 Donald, 1., MacVicar, I. & Brown, T., (1958), 'Investigation of abdominal masses by pulsed ultrasound'
Lancet, No.1, pp.1188-1195; MacVicar, 1. & Donald, I., (1963), 'Sonar in the diagnosis of early pregnancy
and its complications' The Journal o/Obstetrics and Gynaecology o/the British Commonwealth, Vol. LXX,
No.3, pp.387-395.
24 Willocks, J., (1963), 'Foetal cephalometry by ultrasound and its place in clinical obstetrics' MD thesis,
(University of Glasgow); Willocks, 1., (1962), 'The use of ultrasonic cephalometry' Proceedings o/the Royal
Society 0/Medicine, No. 55, p.640; Willocks, 1., Donald, I., Duggan, T.C. & Day, N., (1964), 'Foetal
cephalometry by ultrasound' Journal o/Obstetrics and Gynaecology o/the British Commonwealth, No. 71,
pp.11-20.
25 Donald, I., (1963), 'Use of ultrasonics in diagnosis of abdominal swellings' British Medical Journal, No.2.,
p.1154.
81
could only be achieved if it was sufficiently enlarged as a result of pathology or pregnancy
to be accessed through the abdominal wall. The full bladder technique (as it became known)
thus enabled visualisation of uteri of normal size, facilitating the study of very early
pregnancy. Donald and MacVicar's first success in this area occurred when they observed
an early gestation sac in a woman who had not yet been diagnosed as pregnant.26
There are two points to note about the development of the full bladder technique. The first is
its significance to the further development of obstetric ultrasound. As Donald put it:
Now at last we could really study pregnancy from one end of its
development to the other.27
This technique enabled the scope of obstetric ultrasound to be considerably expanded.
Pregnancy could now be studied, observed and charted to a degree previously unimaginable.
Conditions and pathologies associated specifically with early pregnancy could now be
investigated, as could the gradual development of the embryo and fetus. In other words, the
boundaries of possibility were significantly extended by this'discovery' prompting yet
greater activity on the part of those investigating ultrasound's clinical potential.
The second point to note is that this highly significant event was essentially a product of
chance and circumstance. This technique did not develop as the direct result of deliberate
investigation prompted by either anatomical knowledge of the body and the proximity of
organs, or expertise in ultrasound and its characteristic behaviour in different physical
media. Instead, this technique was the unintended, emergent outcome of diagnostic
ultrasound's interaction with a woman kept waiting too long to be examined and who was
either too polite, embarrassed or deferential to her doctor to ask to be excused for a toilet
trip. Although a mundane and insignificant event in itself, its repercussions and impact on
the development of this technology were enormous. Thus, a major advance in obstetric
ultrasound emerged from a humble and unintentional circumstance.
26 Donald, I., (1974), 'Sonar, - the story of an experiment' p. 115.
27 ibid.
82
Thus when the Queen Mother's Hospital was opened in 1964, the ultrasonic study of
pregnancy was gaining momentum and the team's research activities were relocated to their
new purpose-built location. Here the practice of obstetric ultrasound continued to expand.
As Donald's reputation and knowledge of the work of the Glasgow team began to grow, a
new generation of clinicians was trained in ultrasound techniques at QMH. Amongst them
were figures such as Stuart Campbell, Usama Abdulla and Hugh Robinson. Like John
MacVicar (and Bertil Sunden) before them, these young doctors became involved in the
practice of diagnostic ultrasound because of its clear potential as a research topic for their
MD qualification. Indeed, it is interesting to note that for some of these clinicians
ultrasound appears to have been very much a means to an end. John MacVicar, for example,
gave up obstetric ultrasound once he had acquired his MD, while Hugh Robinson, although
he continued to employ the technology in his later professional career, did not undertake
further research into ultrasound. Thus although the impact of both men on the field was
considerable, they specialised in this area of their professional practice for only a short time.
Others, however, continued to actively pursue careers in which obstetric ultrasound figured
largely. Stuart Campbell, for example, worked as a research registrar in QMH from 1965 to
1968 when he took up a lectureship in obstetrics and gynaecology at Queen Charlotte's
Maternity Hospital in London. There he continued his research into ultrasound, and indeed
was responsible for introducing the technology into that institution. He became Professor at
Queen Charlotte's in 1976, before moving to Kings College Hospital where he remained
until 1996. In that year he moved once more to St. George's Hospital Medical School where
he was Professor and Chair at the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology and the Fetal
Medicine Unit.28
Throughout this prestigious career, Campbell continued to both research
and promote obstetric ultrasound, becoming one of the world's most respected authorities
28 Tansey, E.M. & Christie, D.A., (eds.), (2000), Wellcome witnesses to twentieth cent1ilJi medicine, volume 5.
Looking at the unborn: historical aspects ofobstetric ultrasound, Wellcome Trust, London, p.29 (footnote
64).
83
on the subject.29
Similarly Usama Abdulla, a contemporary of Campbell's at QMH from
1965, carried his interest in obstetric ultrasound to other locations. He moved to Queen
Charlotte's in 1969, then to Chelsea Hospital. In the 1970s he helped establish ultrasound
departments in Oxford and then Liverpool. Thus for young doctors taking the first steps in
their career, new technologies (as ultrasound was in the 1960s) could either form a stepping
stone into their new careers if la MacVicar and Robinson, or could playa more significant
role in their future professional development. Furthermore, the nature of careers in specialist
medicine, and particularly the high degree of geographical mobility which tend to
characterise them, suggest that the MD research route is also a significant one for
technological diffusion within medicine. On leaving Glasgow, Abdulla and Campbell took
their research interests with them and were prominent in transferring the technology to new
locations.
In 1965, however, Campbell was still a Research Registrar at QMH. His project was aimed
at refining the measurement ofBPD. The technique he developed involved the use of both
the A-scope display and the B-scanner. Two-dimensional (B scan) imaging was used to
locate the optimum position from which to achieve mid-line echoes, and then the machine
was switched to the A-mode display for making the actual measurements?O This, in itself,
required another modification to the Diasonograph in the form of a switch installed at the
back of the machine to facilitate movement between the two types of display. That this
modification was performed by one of the engineers from Nuclear Enterprises (and not by
Fleming or Hall at the Ultrasound Technology Unit in the hospital), provides further
evidence of the new forms of collaboration now being fostered between the clinical
researchers in Glasgow and the commercial suppliers in Edinburgh.
29 Campbell's later publications include Campbell, S., (1977), 'Early prenatal diagnosis of neural tube defects
by ultrasound' Clinical obstetrics and gynaecology, Vol. 4, pp.351-59; idem., (1974), 'Fetal growth' Clinical
obstetrics and gynaecology, Vol. I, ppAI-65; idem., (1970), 'Ultrasonic fetal cephalometry by ultrasound'
Journal ofobstetrics and gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth, Vol. 77, pp.1057-63; Campbell, S. &
Dewhurst, C,J., (1971), 'Diagnosis ofthe small for dates fetus be serial ultrasound cephalometry' Lancet, Vol.
2, pp.l 002-6; Campbell, S. & Wilkin, D., (1975), 'Ultrasonic measurements of the fetal abdominal
circumference in estimation of fetal weight' Britishjournal ofobstetrics and gynaecology, Vol. 82, pp.689-97;
Campbell, S., Johnstone, F.D., Holt, E.M. & May, P., (1972), 'Anencephaly: early ultrasonic diagnosis and
active management' Lancet, Vol. 2, pp.1226-7; Campbell, S., Diaz-Recasens, J., Griffin, D.R. et aI, (1983),
'New Doppler technique for assessing blood flow', Lancet, Vol. I, pp.675-77; Campbell, S., Warsof, S.L.,
Little, D. & Cooper, D,J., (1985), 'Routine ultrasound screening for the prediction of gestational age'
Obstetrics and gynaecology, Vol. 65, pp.613-20.
30 Campbell, S., (1968), 'An improved method of fetal cephalometry by ultrasound' Journal ofobstetrics and
gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth, Vol. 75, pp.568-76.
84
Abdulla, on the other hand, worked with Donald in his investigations into the diagnostic
possibilities of visualising the placenta. As they note in one of their first publications in this
area, placentography was a different practice from localisation of the placenta.3l
Localisation often only entailed identifying whether or not the placenta was praevia, i.e. in a
position that would obstruct normal delivery ofthe fetus, or be prone to detaching early and
causing haemorrhage and miscarriage. Placentography, on the other hand, involved a more
detailed survey of the size, nature, texture and position of the placenta. Alternative ways of
achieving information about the placenta were either by direct imaging via soft tissue
radiography, or by inferring the level of placental tissues present through various assays of
maternal blood by thermography, artiography or radioactive isotopes. Thus the ultrasonic
alternative forwarded by Donald and Abdulla was considered to be both safer than
radiography, and more detailed and immediate than the others. This particular clinical use
was given further impetus in the early 1970s when grey scale imaging facilitated more
detailed analysis of this organ.
Again, however, it is clear that new clinical applications were accompanied by further
technical modifications. Donald and Abdulla's research into the placenta was conducted on
a Diasonograph purchased for the hospital by the Scottish Home and Health Department in
1965. Although the research project itself ran from 1965-68, Donald and Abdulla refer to
the first year of the project as 'the experimental year' .32 It is clear, however, that
'experimental' in this context refers not only to the new form of analysis being undertaken
and object of enquiry being studied, but also to changes being made to the equipment being
used. They state, for example:
after some months of modification, calibration and adjustment, the
number of cases investigated began to build up rapidly as experience
and confidence mounted.33
31 Donald, I. & Abdulla, U., (1968), 'Placentography by sonar' Journal ofObstetrics and Gynaecology ofthe
British Commonwealth', Vol. 75, No.1 0, p.993.
32 ibid., p.l 000.
33 ibid., p.993.
85
The importance of these modifications is further underlined in the acknowledgements of
this paper, which are almost entirely devoted to John Fleming and Angus Hall for their
'fresh electronic modifications and refinements' .34 What is significant about this is the way
in which innovation in clinical practice went hand-in-hand with innovation in technical
design. Both were mutually shaped in a way which extended not only medical culture but
also technological design. Neither practice nor technology acted as a stable context here
which could be used to explain the emergence of the other. Rather, they were both moulded
and shaped through their interconnection.
The mid 1960s also really marks the period during which ultrasound crossed the divide
between medical research and medical practice - however fluid and ill-defined that divide
may be. The growth in clinical uses is well illustrated by comparing Donald and McVicar's
initial paper devoted to obstetrics, and Donald's later publication of 1969.35
In the former,
investigative paper, Donald and McVicar concluded:
Sonar examination is useful in the diagnosis of pregnancy after 9
weeks amenorrhoea, to confirm the diagnosis ofthreatened abortion, to
diagnose or exclude hydatidiform mole and to elucidate the type of
tumour if one is found as a complication of pregnancy.36
Further, at this stage, each scan took from one to two minutes to be completed and a
minimum of four scans were taken and recorded for each patient.3
? By 1969 the number of
clinical uses for the technology had increased considerably. These included diagnosis of
twins from seven and a half weeks' gestation; hydramnios, hydrocephalus and
anencephalus; as well as the BPD fetal cephalometry and placentography mentioned
above?8 Thus research practices were gradually put into daily practice to aid the diagnoses
of a number of clinical conditions and potential hazards associated with pregnancy.
34 ibid, p.1 006.
35 MacVicar, 1. & Donald, I., (1963), 'Sonar in the diagnosis of early pregnancy'; Donald, I., (1969), Practical
obstetric problems: 4'" edition, Lloyd-Luke (Medical Books) Ltd., London, (chapter 28, 'Ultrasonics in
obstetrics').
36 MacVicar, 1. & Donald, I., (1963), 'Sonar in the diagnosis of early pregnancy' p.394.
37 These early obstetric scans were performed using the automatic scanner developed by Tom Brown (see
Chapter 1).
38 Donald, I., (1969), Practical obstetric problems.
86
Furthermore, the time taken for each scan had by this time been reduced to around 20
seconds.39
Moreover, changing technical equipment and techniques led to changes in the way cases
were determined and treated. For example, the ability of ultrasound to diagnose incomplete
or missed abortions, meant that women admitted on suspicion of this were only given
dilation and curettage (D and C) if the uterus was found to contain retained products of
conception - i.e. if it was not empty.40 Placental localisation and diagnosis also had a
significant impact on clinical management. Prior to ultrasonic diagnosis of placenta praevia,
for example, women with suspected cases (due to bleeding) would be detained in hospital
for complete bedrest. While ultrasound did not directly bring about a change in management
for this condition, it significantly reduced the number of women advised to remain in
hospital for long durations by distinguishing those who actually had low-lying placenta from
those who did not. As Dr Margaret McNay41 recalls of the period before ultrasound's
employment in such cases, many women remained in hospital needlessly:
We would have three or four patients at anyone time in the wards
taking up beds. They might have had children at home, somebody else
had to look after them [the children], you know, all the social
. 1" fth 42
Imp IcatlOns 0 at.
Furthermore, prior to the introduction of ultrasound, the method of diagnosing the condition
in preparation for the management of labour was a considerably invasive and potentially
hazardous procedure:
In my training [if] you had a patient who presented with bleeding later
in pregnancy and she remained in hospital from several weeks perhaps
until she was 38 weeks and she was then examined under anaesthesia
in theatre. So you examined with the finger in the vagina through the
cervix and you felt whether or not there was placenta there. And if
there was, you were all geared to doing a caesarean section, if there
J9 ibid.
40 Donald, 1., (1974), 'Apologia' pp.136-7; Donald, 1., (1974), 'Sonar - the story of an experiment' p.115.
41 Dr Margaret McNay worked at the Queen Mother's Hospital from 1978 to 1996, where she became
Consultant and Head of the Department of Obstetric Ultrasound.
42 Interview with Dr Margaret McNay, 05111/97. For an account ofjust such a confinement from the
perspective of one former patient see the coda to this thesis.
87
was no placenta there she was wakened up from the anaesthetic and
she was allowed to labour.43
Thus ultrasound's ability to diagnose placenta praevia not only saved many women from the
inconvenience and distress of remaining bed-ridden in hospital for many weeks (which also
had a significant impact on hospital management and availability of maternity beds) but also
meant that the more invasive vaginal examination was eventually dispensed with.
There were, however, other uses to which the technology was put. Donald, for example,
often performed ultrasound scans on women seeking terminations of pregnancy with the
express intention of dissuading them from pursuing this action. In particular, the scan
images would be shown to these women, while the implications of what was displayed on
the image was carefully pointed out by the eminent professor using emotive language. As
Mrs Winnie Childs (who worked as a medical Almoner at the Queen Mother's) recalls:
I always remember very clearly he used to use the ultrasound. [...] The
mothers would come in to him and he was terrific with single
parents... Then of course you would go and have an ultrasound done
and show the mother the picture of this baby you weren't to murder.
This all happened in a busy clinic on a Friday afternoon. So it was full
of drama, you were pretty sure of having a couple of dramatic scenes in
F 'd ft l' . 44
a n ay a ernoon c InlC.
As a member of the Anglican Church, and High Church in his allegiance, Donald's
opposition to abortion was founded on his religious beliefs and was well-known to
colleagues and associates at the time. This was particularly evident in his somewhat
antagonistic relationship with his professorial counterpart in Aberdeen, Sir Dugald Baird.
Also a very eminent and well-respected Professor of Obstetrics, Baird was not opposed to
the practice of abortion and lobbied for the 1967 Abortion Act. Donald, on the other hand,
actively campaigned against the legalisation of abortion not only in the UK in the 1960s, but
also in other European countries such as Italy in the 1970s.45
As well as writing letters to the
media, giving public addresses and so on, his activities in this respect included passing anti-
43 ibid.
44 Mrs Winnie Childs, interviewed by Ian Spencer, (coUliesy ofNicolson, Spencer and Fleming).
45 Donald's audience with Pope John Paul II in 1979 was prompted largely by his anti-abortion campaigning
rather than his obstetric or ultrasound work.
88
abortion petitions around his obstetric wards.46
Thus two of Scotland's most prominent
obstetricians held opposing views on abortion which, although never manifest as open
hostility, did create a general antagonism and rivalry between the two.
It is important to note that the passing of the Act had different implications in Scotland than
in England. Prior to the 1967 Act, Scots Law did not regard the practice of abortion as an
assault on an individual and thus the practice was not technically illegal in Scotland. Indeed,
Professor (later Sir) Malcolm McNaughton, who occupied Glasgow's sister Chair in
Obstetrics alongside Donald from 1970, performed many abortions while working under
Baird in Aberdeen in the 1950s.47
On the other hand, the powerful and privileged position
of Scottish professors enabled them to influence the availability of elective abortions
following 1967. Thus while the details of the Act ensured that the decision to carry out a
termination of pregnancy remained a clinical one, women's access to clinicians willing to
carry out the procedure were dependent on their geographical location. For example,
Donald's influence over obstetrics in Glasgow ensured that women could not obtain such a
procedure within any of the city's hospitals until the arrival of McNaughton in 1970.48
It is clear, therefore, that Donald's political and religious attitudes towards abortion directly
affected the way in which he operated ultrasound in the Queen Mother's Hospital and,
indeed, it continued to do so throughout his professionallife.49
Furthermore, it was widely
known that terminations of pregnancy were not carried out in the Queen Mother's while
Donald was in charge (other than in cases where the fetus was considered 'incompatible
with life'). Thus the number ofwomen scam1ed under such circumstances (both before and
after the passing of the 1967 Abortion Act) indicates a collaboration amongst Donald and
anti-abortion general practitioners to dissuade women from terminations - legal or illegal.
46 Interview with former Queen Mother's Hospital patient.
47 Donald often referred to McNaughton as 'the abortionist in the East' i.e. in the east end of the city. Professor
Sir Malcolm McNaughton, interviewed by Ian Spencer, courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer and Fleming.
48 Professor Sir Malcolm McNaughton, interviewed by Ian Spencer, courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer and
Fleming.
49 The inter-relationship between Donald's anti-abortion stance and his use of ultrasound is further examined in
Chapter 3.
89
Donald's opposition to elective abortion did not mean, however, that he was unsympathetic
to the social consequences of pregnancy. Indeed the appointment of Mrs Childs as Medical
Almoner for the hospital was made at Donald's insistence, in order to provide social work
care for pregnant women and recent mothers. He worked closely with Mrs Childs in the
provision of support and counselling of options for unmarried mothers. Nevertheless, he
was also quick to realise the potential of ultrasound for dissuading those who might
otherwise seek to end their pregnancies.
By the late 1960s, therefore, the Queen Mother's was thriving with ultrasound activity. As
its reputation grew, the team scanned ever-greater numbers of women. These were not only
in-patients at the Queen Mother's, but also referrals from other Scottish and English
hospitals. The card file records of ultrasound examinations that have been kept at QMH
detail patients referred from hospitals in Aberdeen, Perth, Dundee, Bristol and Newcastle, as
well as those from smaller institutions in the Greater Glasgow area. Inter-personal
relationships within the obstetric community and increasing awareness of the work being
carried out in Glasgow prompted clinicians in other locations to send problematic and/or
interesting cases to Glasgow to see what could be made of them. Thus, although ultrasound
machines did not begin to diffuse outside of Glasgow until the late 1960s, their use in
obstetric medicine was already more widespread than the number of machines might
indicate. In studying the spread and uptake of this technology therefore, it is impOliant to
examine not only the movement of machines, but also that of patients. This has important
implications for the study of technological diffusion. Studying the number of units sold or
the 'dispersal' of the technology may not actually reveal a great deal about its diffusion. A
technological artifact may be sold in relatively large quantities, but used in a very limited
manner. On the other hand, as in this example, a technology may have a much wider usage
than its adoption figures imply. This reiterates the importance of regarding technologies as
more than merely machines and artifacts but, instead, seeing them as forms of activity. To
evaluate diffusion by simply counting machines misses this important point and risks
replacing a study of diffusion with a study of sales figures.
When these patient transfers are taken into account, it is possible to view the Queen
Mother's Hospital at this time as the established focal point of the emerging technology.
Indeed, so many cases were being examined that extra help was drafted in. First of all came
90
Mrs Ida Millar, who was appointed in 1964. Millar was the wife of a local general
practitioner of Donald's acquaintance. Her exact role in the Department was somewhat
unusual. Neither secretarially trained nor medically qualified she fulfilled a number of
duties including the organisation of the scanning department and the operation of the
equipment. She was thus the only non-clinician at this time in the hospital who was directly
involved in scanning patients. The position Millar occupied, therefore, was both unique and
created specifically in relation to ultrasound. Millar was, in essence, the first incumbent of
the new occupational category of 'ultrasonographer' - a non-medically qualified person who
performed ultrasound examinations but who was herself unable to make clinical diagnoses.
Thus her role and position within the hospital were defined entirely in terms of her
interactions with ultrasound equipment. For this reason, Millar's appointment indicates an
important time in the technology's history. In the creation of her role can be seen the first
signs of the emergence of a new hierarchy surrounding the technology, and thus ofthe way
in which the practice of ultrasound was helping to shape the organisation of medicine in this
location. Her lack of qualifications might appear yet more unusual in light of Tom Brown's
comments about Donald's reticence to allow the engineer to deal directly with patients
because of his lack of clinical training.50 However, Brown's training and employment as an
engineer entails that he already had a clearly defined role vis avis the technology and thus
could be easily 'allocated' in this emerging hierarchy. Millar, on the other hand, did not
have a pre-determined relationship to ultrasound at all and thus Donald had greater
flexibility with which to determine what tasks could be delegated to her. As a general
practitioner's wife (a social role which often entailed unofficial supporting 'duties' within
medicine, such as maintaining appointment books, filing records and so on), Millar's
previous experience made her well-suited to her new job.
Millar was later joined by a dedicated secretary for the scan department. Thus, concurrent
with the various research projects being undertaken, the Queen Mother's gradually evolved
a working obstetric ultrasound clinic, institutionally integrated with the rest of clinical
practice. The scan department was, in other words, not only a centre of emerging expertise
and research, but also a fully functioning clinical service operated by obstetric clinicians and
with its own dedicated engineering and supp0l1 staff. Furthermore, as the department was
50 See Chapter I.
91
staffed by many of those responsible for its initial innovation, it enjoyed a privileged
position vis avis the technology's commercial suppliers in terms of technical collaboration
and access to new technical developments.51
By the late 1960s, then, Glasgow's success naturally attracted imitation, and it soon ceased
to be the only Scottish city which was equipped with ultrasound.
Introducing a new obstetric technology in Aberdeen
In 1967, Aberdeen Maternity Hospital took delivery of a Nuclear Enterprises NE41 01
machine - the first of such models to be made by the Edinburgh-based firm. Located in a
large hospital campus in the Forresterhill area of the city, Aberdeen Maternity Hospital
(AMH) was in close proximity to both the main hospital (Aberdeen Royal Infirmary) and
the children's hospital (Aberdeen Hospital for Sick Children). Furthermore, the entire
Forresterhill site was also close to the University of Aberdeen, where the three hospitals
served as medical teaching establishments. Thus the maternity hospital formed part of
another university/hospital nexus, with all of the opportunities which that affords in terms of
research, specialisation and funding opportunities. In addition to its association with the
university (and also as a result of it) Aberdeen Maternity was also a tertiary referral centre
for the Grampian region and thus was the main centre of expertise in one of the largest
Health Board areas of Scotland.
It may appear natural that a hospital such as AMH should be the next to join the ultrasound
'bandwagon'. It was another large tertiary referral unit located in one of Scotland's four
main urban centres. Nevertheless, several historically contingent factors brought this about.
The first of these was a significant change in personnel- the retirement of Aberdeen's head
of Obstetric Medicine, Professor Sir Dugald Baird.
Baird's replacement was Ian McGillivray. Trained largely in Glasgow where he received his
MD in 1953, McGillivray had also spent a proportion of his career in Aberdeen where he
served as Senior Lecturer in Midwifery during the late 1950s, before taking a Chair in
Obstetrics and Gynaecology at St. Mary's in London. Thus on his return to Aberdeen in
51 Interview with Mr. John Fleming, 20/09/98.
92
1964 he was already acquainted with the Scottish obstetric community and importantly also
with Ian Donald. A few trips to Glasgow in 1965 appear to have convinced McGillivray that
ultrasound was something with which Aberdeen should become involved. What is
important to note about this is that the initial demand for ultrasound in this location came
from obstetrics and gynaecology. The Diasonograph was not designed to be a tool used
exclusively in this specialty: Donald hoped it would be taken up in more general medical
applications.52 Nevertheless, it was in gynaecology that Donald and his co-workers had first
investigated ultrasound's potential and published their results. Furthermore it was through
the close inter-personal connections in the related fields of obstetrics and gynaecology that
the greatest degree of interest was fostered.
McGillivray, however, needed an ally to help him persuade the local Health Board to
introduce ultrasound and he found this in the person of Professor John Mallard. In 1965,
Mallard arrived in Aberdeen to take up the newly established Chair in Medical Physics at
the University of Aberdeen's Department of Biomedical Physics and Bioengineering - the
first such Chair to be established in Scotland. Mallard's main research interests up to that
point were in the also newly emergent field of nuclear medicine. At the Hammersmith
Hospital and, later, St. Thomas's in London he had worked on the development of
radioactive isotope imaging using a gamma camera (an alternative to the Geiger-Muller
counter, which was used to detect the path of radioactive isotopes once introduced into the
body).53 This was an activity which he continued after his move to Aberdeen54 as well as
52 Interview with Dr Ellis Barnett, 27/08/99. This is also minuted in a report following a meeting attended by
Donald on diagnostic ultrasound (Western Regional Hospital Board, 'Report of the working party on
ultrasonics' August 1971).
53 Mallard, 1., (1996), 'The first century of hospital physics 1895-1995, the evolution of medical imaging
1945-1995, with Aberdeen's role 1965-1995' in Adam, A., Smith, D. & Watson, F., (eds.), 'To the greit
support and advancement ofhelth ': papers on the histOlY ofmedicine in Aberdeen, arisingji'om a conference
held during the quincentenmy year ofAberdeen University, Aberdeen History of Medicine Publications,
Aberdeen; Tansey, E.M., Christie, D.A. & Reynolds, L.A., (eds.), (1998), Wellcome witnesses to twentieth
century medicine, volume 2. Making the body more transparent: the impact ofnuclear magnetic resonance
and magnetic resonance imaging, The Wellcome Trust, London. See also Blume, S.S., (1992), Insight and
indusfly, chapter 6. There are a number of interesting parallels between the emerging fields of ultrasound and
nuclear imaging. Both owe at least part oftheir origins to the military/industry nexus of World War II.
Furthermore, both CT scanning (Computed Tomography) and MRI (nuclear magnetic resonance imaging)
developed as ways of viewing the body via transverse 'views' in the same way as Brown's contact B-scanning
machine. Some of these overlaps where relevant will be referred to in the course of this chapter, but a more
detailed analysis of the dynamics between ultrasound and nuclear medicine would provide an interesting future
study.
5'1 Mallard, 1.R. & Corfield, J.R., (1969), 'A statistical model for the visualisation of changes in the count
density on radioisotope scanning displays' Britishjol//'nal ofradiology, Vol. 42, No.499, pp.530-38.
93
beginning work on the development of another imaging modality - Electron Spin Resonance
(ESR).55 Thus Mallard arrived in Aberdeen with not only a pre-existing interest in new
medical imaging technologies, but also a track record in 'tinkering'. Medical physics itself,
of course, developed as a result of another form of imaging - radiography. Thus the fact that
Mallard was interested in images is not unusual per se. The fact that he had an interest in
new forms of imaging was.
Mallard was first approached by the Professor of Midwifery following his inaugural speech
in 1966, when McGillivray suggested that they might jointly approach the University about
acquiring a Diasonograph. Mallard, who was a consultant to Nuclear Enterprises through his
work with the gamma camera, was also aware of Donald's work and the fact that the
development of ultrasound had moved to Nuclear Enterprises under the guidance of Tom
Brown. The two Aberdeen Professors therefore submitted a grant application to the Medical
Research Council (MRC) for the funds to purchase a Nuclear Enterprises machine and
investigate its clinical uses.
Whatever the particular, personal motivations of these actors may have been, the importance
of having people in such prominent positions interested in procuring the technology is
clearly significant. McGillivray and Mallard were able to access important funding bodies
as well as actors higher than they in the University and hospital hierarchies. They were, in
other words, powerful actors within their own administrative and organisational settings.
Nevertheless, the scanner was not put into use until 1967. The reason for this delay lies in
the number of ways in which the new machine had to be accommodated. The minutes of the
North Eastern Regional Hospital Board (which would later become Grampian Health
Board) record that the cost of installing the Diasonograph was 3 200.56 This however, was
not the cost of the purchase of the machine but of the purpose-built room in which it was to
be housed. The large size of the Diasonograph, but also (and more importantly) its weight
entailed that this significant piece of medical equipment could not simply be placed
55 Mallard, J.R. & Kent, M., (1969), 'Electron spin resonance in biological tissues' Physics in medicine and
biology, Vol. 14, No.3, pp.373-96.
56 Property & Works Committee Minutes, 28 November 1967, Minutes of the North-Eastern Regional Hospital
Board (GRHB AIIl110).
94
'anywhere' in the hospital. Instead a separate room was built to house the machine-
situated alongside the antenatal theatre in the hospital. This part of the installation process
was funded by the hospital's Endowment Fund, with the cost of the actual machine being
met by the MRC.57
From the outset, therefore, the uptake of diagnostic ultrasound was a joint endeavour on two
levels - it was jointly funded by both the MRC and the Regional Hospital Board and was
shared between the Departments of Obstetrics and Gynaecology and Medical Physics. It was
therefore, from the outset, perceived as both a significant research project and an addition to
clinical practice. Nevertheless, the chosen location for the machine is interesting. As in
Glasgow, obstetrics and gynaecology were located in different buildings, although both
were on the same site at Forresterhill. Obstetric cases were located in the Maternity Hospital
while gynaecological ones were treated at the Royal Infirmary.58 Thus ultrasound was
placed squarely within the geographical realm of obstetrics - not only in that it was placed
in the Maternity Hospital but also that it was directly adjacent to the antenatal theatre. It is
tempting to surmise that its location indicates a predisposition towards obstetrics rather than
gynaecology, and sound reasons can be suggested for this. First of all, given that the
investigation of the technology's use in obstetrics was more recent than in gynaecology, it
can be suggested that obstetrics provided more 'uncharted terrain' for research purposes.
John Mallard, as a medical physicist (a profession which he views as central to the
development of new medical technologies59) occupying a newly created Professorial Chair,
had ample motivation to find new areas of ultrasound research in which he could become
involved. Professor McGillivray, arguably, was similarly motivated. Sir Dugald Baird could
not have been a particularly easy act to follow in Aberdeen. The eminent and well-respected
Professor cast a large shadow over the Chair now occupied by McGillivray. Many of the
clinicians who worked under Baird's leadership (affectionately known as 'Baird's Boys')
went on to take up important Chairs in other Universities.
60
Furthermore, Baird was highly
57 ibid.
58 Levack, 1. & Dudley, H., (1992), Aberdeen Royal Injirll1aJY: the people's hospital ofthe North-East,
Bailliere Tindall, London.
59 Interview with Professor John Mallard, 28/3/00
60 Levack, 1. & Dudley, H., (1992), Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, pp.127-28. One of 'Baird's Boys' was, of
course, Professor Malcolm NcNaughton, 'the abortionist in the East'.
95
supportive of research work in a number of areas including cervical smear tests and
infertility treatment. It is possible, therefore, to suggest that ultrasound provided an
expedient way for McGillivray to both stamp his authority on his new role and become
involved in a still highly innovative form of practice. Not only was there the opportunity to
be involved at an early stage with a new obstetric technology, but also the chance to
demonstrate that there was a new Professor in town by working with Baird's old adversary
Ian Donald.
However, despite the fact that obstetrics may have provided greater opportunities for new
research, McGillivray (in his contribution to the Annual report for the hospital board in
1967) provides evidence to suggest that both obstetrics and gynaecology were expected to
benefit from the arrival of ultrasound:
...work has commenced on the provision of a room to accommodate an
ultradiasonograph [sic.] which has been provided by the University.
With this machine it is hoped that there will be a great reduction in the
use of X-rays in pregnancy. This machine is also of great value in the
detection of certain gynaecological conditions.61
Thus the siting of medical ultrasound in the maternity hospital was probably the result of
more practical considerations. The accommodation available for gynaecology as a specialty
was more limited than in the large and independently situated maternity hospital. Indeed, if
the machine were to be installed in the Royal Infirmary, the obvious location would have
been within the Radiology department. Radiology, however, were not involved in the
funding applications for the Diasonograph, nor with its planned installation. Furthermore,
the arrival of the machine occurred only a year after new facilities had been created at the
Royal Infirmary for the Radiology department and thus the reorganisation and upheaval
required to introduce ultrasound would not have been particularly desirable in any case.62
Nevertheless, despite McGillivray's comments recorded above, there is little evidence of the
technology's use in gynaecology until the early 1970s - either from the oral testimony of
61 Annual Report of the Group Medical Superintendent for the Aberdeen Special Hospitals Board of
Management for 1967, p.28 (GRHB B2/2114)
62 Levack, I. & Dudley, H., (1992), Aberdeen RoyallnfirIl1G1J!, Chapter 12.
96
those who used the machine or in their published papers. This in turn was probably a direct
result of the location chosen for the machine which was not particularly convenient for the
examination of gynaecology patients. Thus from the outset, the machine was used as
primarily an obstetrical tool. It can be suggested therefore that in Aberdeen, diagnostic
ultrasound was reconceptualised as an 'obstetric' technology, rather than a general imaging
device, as a result of both practical and personal reasons.
However, the purchase of a new piece of machinery is barely half the story of technology
transfer: staff was required to operate and work with the machine. Once more, the personnel
who were eventually recruited reflected the joint nature of the project. The first, Dr
Alexander [Sandy] McIntosh, was an obstetric registrar at the hospital who was looking for
a suitable research project for his MD qualification and was guided towards ultrasound by
Professor McGillivray. His route into ultrasound therefore was similar to that of James
Willocks, Usama Abdulla, Hugh Robinson and Stuart Campbell in Glasgow and was as a
result of his position in a large teaching hospital.
McIntosh was joined in his new post by Mr Alexander [Sandy] Christie, a young engineer
who represented the Department of Clinical Physics in the endeavour. Christie's route into
ultrasound was more unusual than McIntosh's, however, and is worth considering in some
depth. A former pilot in the Royal Air Force, Christie had changed career in 1963. Although
still with the Ministry of Defence, he moved into electronic engineering, working for a spell
on the development of weapon guidance systems before taking up an appointment as
lecturer in electronics at Bristol College of Science and Technology (now the University of
Bath). Christie first became acquainted with ultrasound through one of his engineering
colleagues at Bristol College who used metal flaw detectors in his work. More significantly,
this colleague was also aware of its emerging application in medicine and particularly the
work of Peter Wells at Bristol Royal Infirmary. Wells was a key player in the development
of diagnostic ultrasound equipment from the early 1960s. His most widely known
97
contribution to the field was his work on the development of Doppler techniques.63
However, Wells also worked in a number of other key areas such as grey-scale imaging and
dynamic focussing.64 When Christie met him in the mid 1960s, he was in the process of
developing an articulated-arm contact B-scanner for clinical use. His interest aroused,
Christie paid a visit to the medical physicist, who in turn put him in touch with Ian Donald:
Peter told me about Ian Donald and all the rest of it and I thought it
sounded to me just quite fascinating - just one of those things you hear
and you think, 'that's interesting' and so I started looking into it. Then
I contacted, I think I wrote to Ian Donald about it and that is when he
invited me to come up [from Bristol]. And I didn't know anything
about it, I don't think I had ever been in a hospital, well, apart from
when I was born!65
Once again, the very active promotion in which Donald was engaged to increase awareness
of medical ultrasound can be seen in this invitation. The Glasgow team appear to have been
very much aware of the importance of enrolling other actors, of fostering interest wherever
it might prove fruitful. In this case, meeting Donald and being infected with his enthusiasm
led Christie to begin work on the design of his own scanner.
How exactly Christie became enrolled into the ultrasound project is recalled differently by
the actors involved. According to Mallard, Christie responded to his advertisement for the
post, attended an interview and was appointed on that basis. Christie, on the other hand,
recollects meeting Mallard the summer before at a social event, where Mallard expressed
63 His publications in this area include: Wells, P.N., (1969), 'A nomogram for the calculation of Doppler
frequency shift' Ultrasonics, Vol. 7, No.1, pp. 18-19; idem., (1969), 'A range gated ultrasonic Doppler
system' Medical and biological engineering, Vol. 7, No.6, pp. 641-52; ide111. , (1970), 'Doppler range finding'
Britishjournalo/radiology, Vol. 43, p.229; idem., (1970), 'The directivities of some ultrasonic Doppler
probes' Medical and biological engineering, Vol. 8, No.3, pp.241-56; Atkinson, P. & Wells, P.N., (1977),
'Pulse-Doppler ultrasound and its clinical application' Yale journal 0/biology and medicine, Vol. 50, No.4,
pp.367-73; Clifford, P.C., Skidmore, R., Bird, D.R., Lusby, RJ., Baird, R.N., Woodcock, J.P. & Wells, P.N.,
(1980), 'Pulsed Doppler and real-time "duplex" imaging of dacron arterial grafts' Ultrasonic imaging, Vo!' 2,
No.4, pp.38l-90.
64 Wells, P.N., (1975), 'Review: absorption and dispersion of ultrasound in biological tissue' Ultrasound in
medicine and biology, Vo!' 1, No.4, pp.369-76; Wells, P.N., Halliwell, M. & Mountford, R.A., (1974), 'A
method of display dynamic range expansion using system gain wobbulation' Ultrasound in medicine and
biology, Vo!' I, No.2, pp.179-81. For more detailed accounts of Wells' career see BMUS, (1987), Bulletin of
the BMUS, No.44; Woo, J. A short histolJi o/ultrasound in obstetrics and gynaecology, www.ob-
ultrasound.netlpwells, (accessed 12/8/99).
65 Dr Alexander Christie, interviewed by Ian Spencer and John Fleming, (courtesy of Nicolson, Spencer and
Fleming).
98
interest in Christie's attempts to construct ultrasound equipment. Following this, according
to Christie, he received a phone call from the Physics Professor offering him a post in
Aberdeen. Christie took up his position in August 1967.
Either way, his appointment in Aberdeen was both fortuitous and unusual. Christie had no
background in medical physics and no clinical knowledge. Nevertheless, he was an
electronic engineer who already had an interest in the physical principles of ultrasound and
its uses in medical and industrial applications.
Christie's entry into medical ultrasound is therefore interesting for several reasons. Firstly, it
demonstrates how novel this technology was in the medical context: that someone such as
Christie who had no previous clinical experience should be invited to help run a new
medical service suggests that personnel with the relevant skills could not be found within
the existing medical establishment. It reinforces, then, that ultrasound did not yet have its
own subset of qualified practitioners and so the skills to be drawn upon had to be sought
from elsewhere - in this case engineering:
I was unique in that nobody when I started up here in Aberdeen,
nobody knew what ultrasound was, they couldn't spell it. [...] For that
reason they just had to sort of say, 'Well, okay, you have to do it' .66
Furthermore, it could be argued that Christie's appointment demonstrates the way in which
technologies which are transferred into new contexts (in this case from the military and
industrial to the medical) provide opportunities for a whole range of actors from varied
professional backgrounds. This implies that as technologies are transferred, so too are skills.
However, just as the equipment itself is moulded by the new context in which it is placed,
so too the skills that are appropriate to one field may be altered by a new one. Furthermore,
the heterogeneity of the actors involved provides additional evidence that despite the fact
that it was now a commercial product, diagnostic ultrasound was in no way a 'stable'
technology, making its way through the 'final stage' of development. Rather it remained an
open and actively negotiated territory, with no professional or occupational barriers to
prevent actors from a variety of backgrounds becoming involved. In a similar way to the
66 ibid.
99
early diffusion of x-rays, ultrasound pioneers were characterised by an enthusiasm for, and
interest in, the technology.67 Indeed, at this stage Christie could almost be viewed as an
'enthusiastic amateur', but he was enfolded within the technology because of the skills
which he brought. Christie went on to spend the next 30 years specialising in obstetric
ultrasound and became a prominent figure within the emerging 'ultrasound community' in
Scotland. He also became something of an ambassador for ultrasound, lecturing across the
world on the technology's uses.
Initially, a substantial part of the remit of the new scanning service in Aberdeen was
evaluation - Christie and McIntosh attempted to assess the capabilities ofthe equipment and
its clinical potential. This, however, is unsurprising: the novelty of the machine, the
operators' lack of experience, and the unfamiliarity of the images meant that it would have
been both foolhardy and unethical to jump straight into clinical diagnosis. One of Christie's
earliest recollections of using the machine in Aberdeen gives some sense ofthe ontological
distance that existed between machine and operator:
We asked our first patient and I remember as I started to scan the
thought that went through my head was, 'You've bitten off more than
you can chew this time son!' I remember that very clearly, I thought,
'What am I doing?,68
Nevertheless, these early experiences with ultrasound should not be characterised as simply
a human learning exercise - a case of learning the 'right' skills to operate the machine and
read the images. Instead, what was being done at this early stage was a form of
human/technical alignment - the new operators were learning the skills necessary to use the
machine in a practical way, while the machine was being tested and modified to align it
with its new operators. In other words, the technology was being shaped in order to make it
'work' in its new location. As in Glasgow, where, for example, teclmical modifications
were made to facilitate the imaging of the placenta by Donald and Abdulla, or to allow
Campbell to switch between imaging modes, the technology was also transformed in
Aberdeen. In order to make practical use of it in this new setting, Christie and McIntosh had
to make their own interpretations and definitions and, more importantly, had to develop
67 Pasveer, B., (1992), 'Shadows of knowledge'; idem., (1989), 'Knowledge of shadows'.
68 Interview with Dr Alexander Christie, 10112/97.
100
their own uses and practices. In other words they had to mould their own technology, using
and developing their own skills and competencies and 'tinkering' with the machine in use.
Nevertheless, before any 'tinkering' to improve or modify the machine could be performed,
the Aberdeen ultrasound workers had to get the equipment to operate reliably:
We had a lot of breakdowns in those early days. If the thing worked for
half a day you were lucky. Then you were calling up Edinburgh and
they were coming up again to fix it and all the rest of it.69
Lack ofreliability in the Diasonograph was a problem shared by the Glasgow group. As
John Fleming recalls:
Initially a lot of the work was improving the Diasonograph - we hadn't
spent enough time on development in the factory so there were still
quite a lot of problems with it. It was electronically unstable and would
oscillate, and there were reliability problems. [...] Some ofthe
potentiometers that measured angles etc. wore out and we had to find a
replacement - they weren't up to the job of being waggled
continuously.70
As the Aberdeen machine was one of the first to be made by Nuclear Enterprises, it was
basically a Smith's machine, complete with valve-based electronics rather than semi-
conductors. However, although similar obstacles were shared by both groups of ultrasound
workers, the implications of a breakdown were more severe in Aberdeen as a greater
amount of scanning time was lost waiting for an engineer from Edinburgh. Thus it was not
the unreliability of the machine, nor the lack of experience of its new operators, which
created problems in Aberdeen. Rather, it was the combination of the two. Christie and
McIntosh could not call upon the services and expertise of actors like John Fleming and so
were far more reliant on the suppliers for assistance.
Furthermore, it is important to note that problems such as this were defined as such during
actual use. That is to say, they were not inherent to the innovation process but were revealed
69 Dr Alexander Christie, interviewed by Ian Spencer and John Fleming, (courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer and
Fleming).
70 Interview with Mr. John Fleming, 20109/98.
101
as the machines began to be used by more and more people in more and more places. Thus
it was only as and when problems such as this emerged that they could be dealt with.
As Latour has noted in his analysis of technology, all machines and technical tools demand
something from those who interact with them.7l Certain skills, competencies or knowledge
are, in his terminology, inscribed within technologies and demand that human operators
behave in a particular manner. In other words, they operate in such a way that they shape
human behaviour. On the other hand, Latour also notes that technological change can itself
be prompted by the way in which people overcome these inscriptions in an attempt to either
side-step what is demanded of them, or to provide new inscriptions.72
An alternative, and
less abstract, way of conceptualising this is in terms of the way in which human operators
occasionally find themselves performing in ways designed to overcome or accommodate the
technical limitations they perceive in the equipment. In Aberdeen for example (when the
ultrasound equipment did work), the operators found manipulating the equipment in order
to achieve the results they wanted required them to physically compensate for the technical
limitations of the Diasonograph:
Your eyes would be sore because you were working in darkness, you
would peer at a tiny little screen and your arm would be sore from
trying to whiz the gantry backwards and forwards, because if you could
keep contact and make it move fast enough you got a better picture
with more scan lines and that meant moving it pretty fast!73
Working in darkness was an accommodation to the display screen on the Diasonograph,
while the physical strain associated with scanning was a direct result of using the equipment
at speeds for which it was ill-suited.
In addition, as an imaging technology it was not only the operation of ultrasound which
demanded certain human competencies and actions, but also the interpretation of its output -
the images themselves:
We didn't know at that time what we were looking at! We looked at it
71 Latour, B.,(1992), 'Where are the missing masses?'
72 Latour, B., (1992), 'Where are the missing masses?'
73 Interview with Dr Alexander McIntosh, 18/08/99.
102
and we saw something and I remember [Alexander (Sandy) McIntosh]
said, 'Oh look,' he said, 'There's a round thing there,' he says, 'I
wonder if that could be a head?'. And that more or less illustrates what
we were doing at that time. We were looking at shapes and trying to
relate them to some form of basic anatomy, very basic, so we were
thrilled to bits if we [...] could actually see and recognise a head or
something that moved. It was there one minute and gone the next.
And then it was sort of, 'Oh well, if that's how we get a head [...]
where's the body?' And then we'd try to put the body and the head
together.74
The procedure for learning to read ultrasound images was similar to that in Glasgow. The
images were constructed and compared with other forms of imaging and representation, as
well as evidence from autopsies and surgery.75 As in Glasgow, however, there were times
when the ultrasonic findings did not match with other representations, from, for example,
radiography. In such cases, a decision was required to determine whether what had been
rendered was real or illusory. One such case occurred relatively early, when a scan appeared
to show an anencephalic fetus:
We were able to show we had a body, we had a lot of fluid - excess
fluid - which was typical of anencephaly, and only a little bump in the
bottom for a head. And then the patient was sent for x-ray and the x-ray
wasn't terribly helpful because it was a very healthy fetus. [The] senior
registrar at the time, he said, 'Well, I think the evidence points to the
fact that it must be [anencephaly], it must be'. And we all waited with
bated breath [while the pregnancy was terminated] but it was in fact
h 1 76
anencep a IC.
Again, this can be regarded as not only a learning process but also a crucially constructive
one. Determining in the images what was 'real' and what was the artifactual outcome of
poor technique, interpretation or technical efficiency was the outcome of the active
alignment of the new operators and equipment. As one obstetrician who worked with
Christie in the early 1970s recalls:
I can remember scanning and I would see there was a funny line there
and Sandy [Christie] would say, 'Artifact!' These in fact were the
74 Interview with Dr Alexander Christie, 10112/97.
75 See Pasveer, Bo, (1989), 'Knowledge of shadows' for a similar account in relation to the construction of x-
ray imaging.
76 Interview with Dr Alexander Christie, 10112/970
103
lateral walls of the ventricles we were looking at, and neither Sandy
nor I knew what we were looking at. So we were looking at things for
years before it dawned on somebody what they were. I always
remember that ...because it kept on appearing on patient after patient
and Sandy said, 'Artifact!'77
The images were also compared with other ultrasound pictures, either created by Christie
and McIntosh themselves or by other actors in the field. Indeed Christie recalls sending
Polaroids of images to Donald in Glasgow:
I used to ring him up and I used to send him pictures and things like
that and he would send me little notes saying, 'Well done, I agree the
diagnosis, that's definitely a head'.78
This again demonstrates the difference in kind which existed between the two groups of
actors. The expertise which had emerged along with the technology in Glasgow entailed that
the Glasgow team had substantially moved along from identifying heads in images, and thus
Donald was able to perform the role of instructor. In Aberdeen, on the other hand, the
emphasis was on identifying what the machine could do, how it was operated and what the
images displayed. This difference is also evident in the Aberdeen researchers' first major
project, on placental localisation. In contrast to Glasgow's concurrent research into
placentography and the detailed scans they were performing, Christie and McIntosh
concentrated on localisation: identifying the position of the placenta ultrasonically, and
comparing their findings with the post-operative placental location following caesarean
section deliveries. They were therefore following the established scientific practice of
assessing the reproducibility of the work of others: was ultrasound an efficient and reliable
means of determining the precise location of the placenta? As McIntosh recalls, a large
number of patients had to be scanned in order to ensure a statistically viable number of
caesarean section candidates:
I used to haunt the antenatal clinics and bully everyone and I got hold
of every single patient I could think ofwho looked as though they
might require a caesarean section. Previous caesar, small stature,
elderly pregnant, whatever, and I would ask them if they minded
having a scan. We would localise the placenta and note it. If they had a
77 Interview with Dr Jack Crichton, 09/02/98.
78 Interview with Dr Alexander Christie, 10112197.
104
caesarean section it was put in the notes (the clinicians didn't know
where the placenta was, we didn't report). The clinicians were then
asked if the patient required a caesarean section would [they] kindly
make a careful note of where the placenta was.79
In order to achieve their target sample of 100 cases (i.e. those who actually underwent
caesarean section), Christie and McIntosh scanned around 1,000 women. These findings on
the ability of ultrasound to detect the location of the placenta were presented at the first
World Congress on Ultrasonic Diagnostics in Medicine in Vienna in 1969.
However, what is most significant about this research project was that it helped embed the
technology within antenatal practice in Aberdeen. Following this research, Christie and
McIntosh began to receive referrals from the hospital's obstetricians requesting scans for
placental localisation.
Obstetricians could easily recognise the utility and practicality of a visualising modality
which could tell them with a certain degree of accuracy where they would find the placenta
if they were about to perform an invasive surgical procedure on a pregnant woman (such as
amniocentesis or caesarean section). Thus the acceptance of this technology amongst the
medical community in Aberdeen cannot be attributed solely to the culmination of a gradual
learning process on the part of Christie and McIntosh. An equal if not greater contributory
factor lay in the properties and abilities of the equipment - it was finally able to do what they
wanted with the degree of accuracy which they desired.
Nevertheless, while Aberdeen's obstetricians began to adopt ultrasound images as part of
clinical diagnosis, the attitude of the hospital's radiologists is much less clear. In light of the
work being done at the Western Infirmary in Glasgow by Ellis Barnett and Patricia
Morley80, it might have been expected that the Aberdeen radiological staff would have
shown some interest in the new imaging technology - even within obstetrics. This appears
79 Interview with Dr Alexander McIntosh, 18/08/99.
80 Their publications from this period include Morley, P. & Barnett, E., (1970), 'The role of ultrasound in the
diagnosis of pelvic masses', Britishjournal ofradiology, Vol. 43, No. 513, pp.602-16 and Donald, I., Morley,
P. & Barnett, E.,(1972), 'The diagnosis of blighted ovum by sonar' Journal 0.(obstetrics and gynaecology of
the British Commonwealth, Vol. 79, No.4, pp.304-10.
105
not to have been the case, although Christie and McIntosh diverge slightly in their
recollections of the role of radiology during the early days of ultrasound's career in
Aberdeen. According to Christie, the chief radiologist in Aberdeen was slightly interested in
learning about the technology while the other radiologists were somewhat hostile:
I had a reasonable relationship in Aberdeen with the chief radiologist
who in fact saw that if he didn't sit down with me and learn something
about it he might be left behind. However, he didn't do very much, but
I mean he showed interest.81
The radiologist attitude that I found was I thought they were afraid of
it. They didn't understand it, therefore they were afraid of it, therefore
it was no good and therefore they weren't going to have anything to do
with it. That was the attitude I found both in Aberdeen and Dundee.82
Thus it was Christie's view that the radiological staff did not become involved with the
service at the time of its introduction because they were not particularly keen to learn about
it or to become involved with its development. However, McIntosh recalls that:
The radiology department initially said they would have regular
meetings and you can show us your pictures and we will comment on
them. What I think they had in mind was they would do the reporting
and we would do the donkey work..., It used to frustrate me
tremendously and as I was quite young at the time I thought I couldn't
say too much because I've got a career to think of but I think Sandy
[Christie] used to get very irritated. I think it did come across from
some that he was not a doctor.83
Thus in McIntosh's account, the radiological staff were interested in the ultrasound project -
at least in so far that they attempted to oversee its running - but it was McIntosh and Christie
who resisted this. As is the nature of oral history, it is extremely difficult to entirely unpick
the past through reliance on the oral testimony alone. However, two tentative conclusions
can be suggested. Firstly, it can be surmised that the radiology department did not become
81 Interview with Dr Alexander Christie, 10112/97.
82 Dr Alexander Christie, interviewed by Ian Spencer and John Fleming, (courtesy of Nicolson, Spencer and
Fleming).
83 Interview with Dr Alexander Mcintosh, 18/08/99.
106
formally involved in the project at this time, whatever the underlying reasons.84 Secondly,
reading between the lines of both accounts it could be suggested that even though the
radiology department may have made some attempt to participate, this was only half-hearted
and unsuccessful. It is important to note that, institutionally, the Department of Radiology at
Aberdeen had no particular requirement to become involved with the project. They had not
been involved in the purchase of the machine, the employment ofthe operators and the
setting up of the project. There may, therefore, have been an institutional reason for their
apparent lack of interest.
Despite the slightly different nuances in their recollections, what is interesting is that both
Christie and McIntosh go on to draw on the nature of ultrasound images and the
practicalities of diagnosis by ultrasound when discussing the relationship between the staff
of the two imaging modalities. For Christie, ultrasound is used as a tool to explain the
hostility of radiologists:
When they did see [ultrasonic images], the pictures were not the
standard slices that x-ray always was. [...] There was no standard here
because there was literally an infinite number of planes that could be
imaged that they had never seen before, that none of us had ever seen
before. They couldn't figure it out at all because basically with the
patient lying flat the views we were taking were slices in a direction
they never took slices in, they had never seen slices that way.85
Thus, for Christie, the radiologists were resistant to the ultrasonic images because they
differed so dramatically from the representations produced with x-rays: their prior
knowledge of x-ray technology entailed that they were disadvantaged when it came to
reading and interpreting ultrasound echo-images. This perspective lies in stark contrast to
the general conception of the relationship between radiology and ultrasound and also
appears odd in light of the high degree of involvement of radiologists in other hospitals.
What is also noteworthy is the way in which Christie expresses the difference between
ultrasound and radiology in the quotation above. He uses the word 'slice' to describe x-ray
84 Indeed this is supported by the testimony of other interviewees who were involved in the scanning service at
a later date. Interview with Dr Valerie Farr, 10/05/98; interview with Dr Norman Smith, 01104/98; telephone
interview with Professor Allan Templeton, 05/03/99.
85 Dr Alexander Christie, interviewed by Ian Spencer and John Fleming, (courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer and
Fleming).
107
images, which is inappropriate in this context. X-ray images are not visual slices (i.e.
transverse views) in the same way that ultrasound images are. Thus Christie is using the
language of ultrasound to describe a very different technology, demonstrating the way in
which his own perceptions of an unfamiliar imaging modality is at least partly shaped by a
familiar one.
In McIntosh's account it was the radiologists' unfamiliarity with the way in which the
images were produced which was the problem, but which also provided an opportunity for
McIntosh and Christie to resist control from that department:
Sandy [Christie] and I could actually cook a picture to make it look like
anything we wanted to and then laugh if they got it all wrong. You
could manufacture a placenta on a picture if you wanted to just by
twiddling the machine a bit. A still image like that is only one part of a
total scan and we used to try and say to the radiologists, 'If you were
asked to do a barium meal or enema would you report on a couple of
films taken at random after swallowing the barium by your
radiographer and say, "there's your barium enema and a couple of
films now make a diagnosis"?'. You can't do that with ultrasound. It's
a dynamic process and the diagnosis is made at the time you do the
scan by the person doing the scan.
86
In this way, both Christie and McIntosh have woven the images themselves and their
production into their narratives. Relationships between themselves and other professionals
have become expressed and explained through reference to ultrasound images and their
construction: in other words, the practicalities of image construction and interpretation have
become part of their social and professional boundary-drawing, demarcating them from
other professional groups. Thus, while still in its infancy as a professional structure and
specialty, ultrasound and the forms of knowledge which it had helped to produce were
already emerging (at the level of discourse and narrative as well as the level of practice) as a
distinct area of medical expertise in Aberdeen.
Indeed the inextricability of the social and the technical is further highlighted when
McIntosh's comments above regarding the inability to diagnose from snapshot pictures is
86 Interview with Dr Alexander McIntosh, 18/08/99.
108
juxtaposed with the fact that the Aberdeen ultrasound team would often send pictures to
Donald in Glasgow for confirmation of their diagnoses.87
Such activities drew on shared
knowledge and expertise based around the technology, and also (probably) on the social
need for disparate groups of practitioners to maintain links and construct recognition with
those at the forefront of the technology's development.
There is another significant point to be noted here. In the quotation above, McIntosh implies
that the reason he and Christie were able to 'cook' a picture lay in the fact that the
radiologists could not tell from which angle the image had been created. The machine itself,
however, could. As noted in Chapter 1, one of the most important reasons for the large
scanning frame of the Diasonograph design was that it enabled calculations to be made
which could indicate the exact position ofthe probe in space. Thus, if the position of the
probe could be determined, then the angle from which the scan was made could also be
recorded. However, it is significant that this technical solution to orientation does not appear
to have been in use in Aberdeen. Instead, the angle and direction of the image was being
deduced on the basis of clinical, anatomical knowledge. Thus the same machine was being
used very differently in Aberdeen from the way it was used in Glasgow. This provides
further evidence of innovation in practice - the same intentions and goals were being
pursued in both locations, and with the same type of machine, but with different methods.
To conclude this section, the introduction of obstetric ultrasound in Aberdeen highlights the
complex and intricate way in which a new teclmology is made to 'work' in a new
environment. Interactions between operators and equipment took two forms - the first was
in the construction ofultrasonic images and the second in their interpretation. However,
fundamental to these two kinds of interaction was their inter-relatedness: images could be
altered by altering the scan process or the machine itself, while interpretations of images
could lead back to further manipulation of the machine or changes in the way scans were
conducted.
Furthermore, clinical utility was the negotiated outcome of these interactions. The main
emphasis was on trying to find the best way (in terms of exposure time, probe position,
87 See footnote 78.
109
frequency etc.) to get an image from the machine which then had to be deciphered by
comparison with other representations ofthe inside of pregnant women's bodies.
Furthermore, this process also crucially involved delineating 'reality' from 'artifact' (i.e.
echoes in the image which were not considered to relate to actual physical structures, but to
have been created by problems with the machine or double echoes etc.).
What this highlights, then, is the way in which the creation of clinical utility and practical
reliability was contingent upon the mutual accommodation of the human, social and
technical elements of ultrasound technology - the way in which various elements merged
together created the emergent shape of the technology.
Thefurther diffusion ofultrasound in the early 1970s
In the early 1970s new Nuclear Enterprises ultrasound machines were installed in a number
of Scottish hospitals. As well as Scotland's other major cities such as Edinburgh and
Dundee, smaller local providers also began to equip themselves with the technology. Thus
by 1973, there were 25 ultrasound machines installed in hospitals across Scotland.88
As each machine was installed in a new location, the same mutual adaptation of new users
to new machines and vice versa was undertaken. Whether the technology itself was by this
time eight or ten years old was irrelevant to new users faced with ultrasound equipment for
the first time. In Perth, for example, an obstetric ultrasound service commenced in 1973.
Sandy Christie was principally responsible for the new service, having left Aberdeen in
1970 to take up a new post at Dundee Royal Infirmary (which was affiliated to the maternity
hospital in Perth). Christie was assisted by an obstetrics registrar at the hospital- Dr Jack
Crichton, whose recollections of his first experiences are reminiscent of those of Christie
88 Scottish Home & Health Department, (1979), Report on the Future Development ofUltrasound in Scotland,
unpublished report, p9.
110
five years earlier:
Nuclear Enterprises came along and put the Diasonograph in one of the
side rooms in the gynae ward. It was sitting there and I was itching to
get my hands on it and there was a girl associated with N.E. sales...and
I sort of conned her into giving me an instruction book. I tried to scan
oranges and balloons filled with water and things like that and was
getting nowhere.89
Thus increasing familiarity with ultrasound through either the published work of others or
from colleagues who had experience of the technology was entirely different from actually
using the equipment itself. This reinforces the significance of the performative nature of
technologies such as ultrasound. Furthermore, with such an interactive technology even an
instruction manual would provide little assistance for the new operator: only by actually
using the equipment, adapting to its capabilities and features and 'learning-by-doing' could
familiarity with ultrasound be gained. In other words, substantial degrees of tacit knowledge
and craft skill were associated with ultrasound imaging using the Diasonograph.
Furthermore, not all of the equipment being installed during this period was manufactured
by Nuclear Enterprises. From around 1967 alternative models of ultrasound equipment
appeared in the UK.90
The first ofthese was the Vidoson, made by the German firm of
Siemens and launched in that country in 1965. The Vidoson was a very early real-time, or
rapid B-scan machine. Another potential competitor was Kretztechnik of Austria, who had
entered the field of medical ultrasound in 1962 when they launched an A-scope machine for
ophthalmology and for neurology. In 1965, in association with Dr Alfred Kratochwil, Kretz
became involved in obstetric ultrasound using their A-scope machine, and by 1967 they had
launched a B-scan machine on the market in Europe. Thus alongside the increasing
diffusion of the Diasonograph design, the early 1970s also saw the embryonic beginnings of
commercial competition the UK. In the context of new and emerging markets, it is
important to note that Kretz in particular were able to gain entry by exploiting sales staff
and organisational structures already in place in the UK. Kretz were well-established
89 Interview with Dr Jack Crichton, 09/02/98. Crichton was later involved with the development of obstetric
ultrasound in the Western Isles - see Chapter 3.
90 The emergence of competitive markets for obstetric ultrasound equipment is dealt with in Chapter 3.
III
manufacturers of non-destructive testing equipment and thus had sales staff already
available to market and sell in the industrial sector. It was thus not too problematic for this
sales team to widen their scope to include contacts within the field of medicine.
Nevertheless, in Scotland, Nuclear Enterprises dominated early ultrasound sales. It would
not be until towards the end of the 1970s that a truly competitive market would emerge in
Scotland, when smaller real-time portable units began to appear.91
As late as 1977, for
example, of the 38 B-scan machines in use in Scottish hospitals, Kretztechnik manufactured
only six.92 Still, it is worthwhile examining the introduction and use of one of these non
Nuclear Enterprises machines in some detail as it provides further insights into the
heterogeneity of ultrasound's development in practice.
In 1971, the Chief Radiologist for Fife hospital services, Dr Peter Aitken, purchased a
Kretztechnic machine for use in Kirkcaldy's general hospital, The Victoria. The scanner
was purchased with funds provided by the local police federation, who collected money for
the hospital following the death of one of their members, Ms Maisie Douthwate, who died
of leukemia in 1970 and who had been a patient at the hospital.93
The main clinical rationale
for acquiring this particular piece of medical equipment was to examine head injuries in
order to better determine which cases should be transferred to Edinburgh for specialist
treatment and which could remain in the smaller district general hospital. The imaging
modality employed by this particular machine was known as a C-scan. This form of imaging
created a scan image which was perpendicular to the position of the probe and at a constant
pre-determined depth. Thus the transducer would be manipulated across the skull and only
those echoes received from the desired depth would be displayed. This imaging modality,
therefore, enabled clinicians to trace the midline echo of the brain - deviations in the echo
indicated a shift in the midline associated with either blood clots or tumours in the brain.
Thus according to Dr Aitken, it was the quality of images generated by this machine for this
very specific type of examination which attracted him to this particular model.
However, having acquired such a machine, the radiologist was keen to extend its uses by
91 See Chapter 3.
92 Scottish Home & Health Department, (1979), Future Development ofUltrasound, pl.
93 Interview with Dr Peter Aitken, 2212199.
112
transforming it into a machine which could also perform B-scans. Such a modification was
not, however, entirely straightforward - the hospital did not have the space to accommodate
the large gantry frame associated with the Diasonograph (or with the Kretz-made
equivalent). The solution proposed was to construct some form of hybrid using a mobile x-
ray base:
I said to them [the engineers from Kretz], 'look, can't we make this up
as a mobile unit on a mobile unit X-ray base? Put the pantagraph on
where the tube column would be and mount the A and the B scan on
the mobile base?,94
In this way, the radiologist in Kirkcaldy, aided by engineers from Kretztechnic and GEe,
effectively created an early version of a mobile ultrasound machine, which could be
wheeled from ward to ward and thus did not require a dedicated room.
This example provides a neat illustration of the number of factors which can affect
technological developments of this nature. Firstly, the type of scanner used was initially
chosen for neurological examinations rather than obstetric or gynaecological ones, but was
later adapted for more general abdominal examinations. It is thus significant that the man
responsible for choosing the scanner was a radiologist rather than an obstetrician. His
concerns and responsibilities did not rest with anyone particular specialty, but rather was
more generally related to visual diagnosis. In this instance, he was prompted in his choice of
equipment by what he perceived as a pressing clinical need to provide an accurate triage
system for head injury patients. More importantly, while this motivated his initial choice of
machine, it also helped shape the development of scanning in this location. The hybrid unit
built at the hospital performed a variety of scans and could be used to image various areas of
the body. Indeed, the fact that this was a small general hospital, rather than a large specialist
centre, also contributed to the shape of the technology here. An expensive piece of medical
technology was adapted to perform a variety of roles, thus justifYing its cost.
Furthermore, this example also demonstrates that innovative practices continue once the
'consumptionjunction,95 has been traversed. In other words, buying a machine from a
94 Interview with Dr Peter Aitken, 22/2/99.
95 Shwartz Cowan, R., (1987), 'The consumption junction'.
113
commercial company does not indicate the end of 'innovation', but merely the point at
which different users begin to influence development. It is also important to note that the
Kirkcaldy hospital was not a large specialist centre with dedicated research staff, access to
funding bodies and an institutional agenda for research and development in clinical practice.
Rather this is a very small-scale, local story both in terms of the funding of the machine's
purchase and in terms of its development. Technological development was prompted by
site-specific local concerns and practical problems. Thus technological transformations
could and did occur when ultrasound was introduced to new circumstances and new
locations.
With increasing numbers of hospitals acquiring ultrasound machines, and with its use
beginning to extend to more and more applications (particularly within the field of
obstetrics, but also with more general abdominal conditions) a distinct set of ultrasound
practitioners was beginning to emerge by the end of the 1960s. Furthermore, with machines
beginning to be manufactured by other companies located in Germany, the USA and Japan,
ultrasound was beginning to be known and used in other areas of the world. Publications
were thus being produced at an ever-increasing rate by the scattered groups of ultrasound
researchers.
Until the end of the 1960s, aside from such communication in the published media, relations
between ultrasound workers in Scotland remained largely informal in nature. Researchers,
for example, would visit the Queen Mother's Hospital to see the Glasgow group's operation
in practice, while letters noting interesting cases or unusual findings would be sent back and
forth. The major exception to this informality was Ian Donald, who embarked on several
lecture tours from the mid 1960s onwards. Nevertheless, it was not until 1969 that moves
were made to create a more formalised ultrasound community.
The first layer of this community was created at the international level. A World Congress
on Ultrasonic Diagnostics in Medicine was held in Vienna in 1969, to which those with an
interest in medical ultrasound were invited. It was at this conference that McIntosh and
Christie presented their findings on placental localisation, while papers were also delivered
by some of the Glasgow group including Donald. During this meeting the decision was
made to form an International Federation for Medical Ultrasonics, which would provide a
114
forum for the interchange of ideas and innovations in the field. Thus the first formalised
body to represent medical ultrasound was the product of international collaboration.
This was complemented at the UK level by the formation of the British Medical Ultrasound
Group (BMUG) in December of the same year. Once again, the decision to institute such a
Group was taken at a symposium in London on 'The Prospects for Future Developments in
Ultrasonic Diagnostics'.96 Interestingly, this symposium was called by two separate
professional bodies - the British Institute of Radiology and the Hospital Physicists
Association - who also undertook to set up the new Group. This in itself reflects the
different development of ultrasound in England where, unlike Scotland, the obstetrics
profession did not dominate the new technology to the same extent.
According to the first Bulletin of the British Medical Ultrasonics Group (which would
become their journal), the purpose of the Group was:
to stimulate communication on Medical Ultrasonics activities, to
organise occasional scientific meetings and to represent UK interests in
the proposed International Federation for Medical Ultrasonics.97
Furthermore, membership of the Group was open to all parties of whatever professional
background who had a bonafide interest in ultrasound's uses in medicine. From the outset,
therefore, this body was both a broad school and a specialised interest group with an initial
membership of 'about 200,.98
An advisory panel was formed which included Ian Donald
and John Mallard to advise on Group policy. The BMUG, therefore, represented the
emergence of an identifiable 'ultrasound community' in the UK - a collection of actors who
shared a common interest in a new form of practice and who, in some ways, considered
themselves slightly different from their traditional professional colleagues. From the outset,
the group included obstetricians, radiologists, medical physicists, engineers, and so on. In
forming such a Group, they were acknowledging their common position in relation to the
new technology, while at the same time recognising that meaningful exchanges of
96 SMUG, (1970), Bulletin ofThe British Medical Ultrasonics Group, No.1, March. For the proceedings of
the Symposium see British Journal ofRadiology, Vol. 43, No. 507, (1970) pp.226-229.
97 SMUG, (1970), Bulletin, No.1, March.
98 ibid
115
information could better be achieved through communication with one another, than with
colleagues in their own respective professions. The Group (which changed its name in 1978
to the British Medical Ultrasound Society) undoubtedly helped to promote the technology in
the UK, and to foster an identity for ultrasound within medical practice.
This growing sense of community was also mirrored at the more local level. At the Queen
Mother's Hospital, for example, ad hoc demonstrations for visitors were replaced in 1970
by formal training courses. These were co-ordinated from the Department of Clinical
Physics and Bioengineering -led by Professor John Lenihan. Lenihan and Ian Donald put
aside any differences they may have had prior to this99
and began to discuss developing an
ultrasound training course as early as 1967.100
The first course was run in January 1970 by
Norman McDicken, a physicist working in Lenihan's department, who had prepared a two-
week programme of lectures and demonstrations. In addition, attendees of the course visited
the Queen Mother's and the Western Infirmary to see ultrasound in practice. The new sense
of community being fostered amongst ultrasound workers in the UK is illustrated by the fact
that this course was announced in the second Bulletin ofBMUG.101
Initially, the attendees were mainly clinicians, although by 1978 the department was
offering separate courses for registrars and for radiographers.102 Thus, partly in recognition
of the growing interest in medicai ultrasound, and partly through the increasing sense of
ultrasound as an identifiable and specialist practice, training courses were formalised. This
additionally helped to cement Glasgow as one of the main centres of excellence in the new
technology and the centre of the emergent ultrasound community. Indeed, the first formal
meeting ofBMUG as a separate body was held at the Queen Mother's in December 1971 103
and in December 1972, Professor Donald was elected as the first President of the BMUG
Committee.104
99 See Chapter I.
100 Fleming, J.E.E., (2001), 'Ultrasound: the Glasgow factor' in Wilson, D.B. & Geyer-Kordesch, 1., (eds.),
Physics and physic: essays in memOlY 0/John M.A. Lenihan, Wellcome Unit for the History of Medicine,
Glasgow, pp.63-79.
101 BMUG, (1970), Bulletin o/The British Medical Ultrasonics Group, No.2, July.
102 BMUG, (1978), Bulletin o/The British Medical Ultrasonics Group, No. 22, June.
103 BMUG, (1971), Bulletin o/The British Medical Ultrasonics Group, No.3, January.
104 BMUG, (1973), Bulletin o/The British Medical Ultrasonics Group, No.8, March.
116
Furthermore, in 1973, Lenihan's department took over responsibility for the maintenance of
ultrasound equipment in the entire West of Scotland region. Two years earlier at a working
party on ultrasonics called by the Western Regional Hospital Board, it was argued by
Lenihan and Donald that commercial ultrasound manufacturers had not provided such a
service, which was essential for the smooth running of a clinical service.lOS Following the
formation of the Greater Glasgow Health Board, this recommendation was put into action
and Mr Rowland Eadie was hired to maintain the, by then, ten machines in the Greater
Glasgow area. 106 The uniqueness of this service needs to be noted. Rather than lobbying the
commercial suppliers to provide a more adequate maintenance service, the Health Board
were taking it upon themselves to fulfil this role. To some extent, this may be indicative of
the nature of the relationship between ultrasound's innovators in Glasgow and Nuclear
Enterprises who were, by far, the main commercial suppliers. Moreover, this service also
provides evidence of the increasing diffusion ofthe technology and its growing prominence
in medical practice.
Conclusions
In the first half ofthe 1960s, diagnostic ultrasound in the UK remained a Glasgow-based
activity. By the mid-1970s, however, the technology had begun to appear across Scotland,
not only in large research-oriented teaching hospitals, but also in smaller local district
general and maternity hospitals. Thus in the twelve years or so after the launch of the
Smith's Diasonograph in 1963 a market for the technology slowly began to emerge.
Neveliheless, it is evident that the instalment of ultrasound machines to a growing number
of individual hospitals was only one part of the process of diffusion. The purchase of
ultrasound equipment was itself the outcome of a number of activities - from the publication
of research papers demonstrating new uses for ultrasound in obstetrics, to the organisation
of training courses for new users and the creation of forums in which those interested in the
technology could communicate their experiences. In other words, the diffusion of ultrasound
was constructed by those who took up the technology - as much as by the manufacturers
who sold the machines. Through formal and informal demonstrations and communications,
105 Western Regional Hospital Board, 'Report of the working party on ultrasonics' August 1971.
106 Fleming, lE.E., (2001), 'Ultrasound: the Glasgow factor'.
117
published research papers and 'word of mouth' knowledge of ultrasound and its growing
number of clinical uses spread to new actors in other Scottish locations. Furthermore,
patient referrals to Glasgow from a wide range of locations demonstrate another aspect of
this technology's diffusion which did not involve the actual purchase of equipment. Overall
therefore it is evident that the diffusion of obstetric ultrasound was about a great deal more
than simply the movement of artifacts or the number of units sold - also implicit here was
the movement of people, ideas and knowledge.
Indeed, the type of research activities which went on in Glasgow were essential to the
technology's diffusion - they provided a focal point for actors in other locations and
diffused knowledge and awareness of the potential clinical uses of the technology. This was
further reinforced with the collaboration of the Regional Medical Physics Department
through training courses and through their role in servicing ultrasound equipment installed
in hospitals in the region.
Furthermore, inter-personal communications between ultrasound operators in different
regions of Scotland were facilitated by the emergence of an identifiable 'ultrasound
community' in the UK with a strong Scottish contingent. Such associations provided a
forum in which geographically separated groups of actors could share ideas and innovations
in technique, and learn from one another. Nevertheless, this 'community' was given its
raison d'etre through its membership's relationship to ultrasound machines. In other words,
what united those within this community, and what differentiated them from their peers and
colleagues out with it, was their interaction with medical ultrasound. Thus while the
emergence of the BMUG, for example, helped to foster a growing sense of this community,
the Group itself was predicated on the increasing diffusion of ultrasound to new locations.
In this way the emergence of an identifiable set of workers with a shared interest in the new
technology was a phenomenon born of ultrasound itself. The very thing that gave its
members - drawn from a wide range of disciplines and backgrounds - a common purpose
was the technology itself.
Furthermore, the motivations which drove those in other locations to purchase and install an
ultrasound machine were complex and varied. There is no over-arching, mono-causal factor
which can explain why this technology was adopted in new places. In Aberdeen Maternity
118
Hospital, for example, personal motivations (such as the desire to establish one's reputation
in research or to keep up with colleagues in other centres) merged with clinical objectives,
funding opportunities, the creation of a new Chair and the appointment of new senior staff.
At The Victoria Hospital in Kirkcaldy, on the other hand, the desire to make greater use of
an ultrasound machine purchased to fulfil an entirely different clinical objective, also
interacted with other influences. These included the growing awareness of the utility of such
equipment in obstetrics and gynaecology through the work of the Glasgow group, a close
working relationship with a manufacturer trying to make headway in Scotland and the
location of obstetrics and gynaecology within the same institution. Thus the introduction of
obstetric ultrasound in new places was the outcome of various factors, rooted in each
location.
It is also clear that one of the main clinical objectives associated with the purchase of
ultrasound equipment was for use in obstetrics. Although this was not universal (as the
example from Kirkcaldy's Victoria Hospital illustrates) the fact remains that by the late
1960s obstetrics had emerged as the medical specialty most closely associated with
diagnostic ultrasound. This relationship would be further reinforced over the next 10 years.
Part of the explanation for this undoubtedly lies with the Glasgow group's publications
throughout this period and their varied research projects on obstetric conditions. More
significant still, however, might be the close-knit nature of the obstetrics community in
Scotland. Tertiary referral centres in Scotland were located in only four locations -
Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Dundee. By the end of the 1960s obstetric ultrasound
was being used in three of these locations and thus clinicians who referred patients to these
centres learned of the technology's capabilities and attributes in the field. Another
significant factor is undoubtedly the availability ofresearch and clinical 'material'
associated with obstetrics. As a consequence of the centralised medical management of
pregnancy, obstetric medicine has unparalleled access to a substantial proportion of the
population of interest - including both 'normal' and 'abnormal' cases. Thus, for a
technology in its infancy, the opportunities to extend current practice by finding new uses
for the equipment were perhaps greater in obstetrics than in other fields.
The accidental discovery of the full-bladder technique was also a major influence here. As a
result of this, ultrasound became the only technology of the time which could directly
119
visualise early pregnancy providing opportunities to visually monitor the gradual maturation
of 'normal' gestations. In this way, ultrasound created new forms of knowledge and practice
and new ways of differentiating normality and pathology. Studying the form and texture of
the placenta in the Queen Mother's, for example, created new categories of disease and
possible pathology. Not only were these new forms ofpractice essentially born afthe
technology - they also created new and unexpected clinical advantages through which its
necessity as an obstetric tool could be further established.
Nevertheless, the privileged access that the Queen Mother's had to expert technical and
engineering assistance, through its Ultrasound Technology Unit as well as Lenihan's
department, was unparalleled. Actors in other locations had to find the necessary skills and
expertise on their own. Some of this was acquired through the appointment of new staff
members possessing skills considered to be relevant and who were drawn from outside the
medical establishment - such as Sandy Christie. In this way, actors were directly enrolled
into the emerging ultrasound community. However, it is evident that whether an actor's
skills were initially in engineering, obstetrics, radiology or medical physics, the main way in
which the skills of obstetric ultrasound diagnosis were learned was through practice.
Familiarity with obstetric ultrasound was achieved through hands-on experience, learning
how to best move the probe to achieve a readable image, comparing ultrasound images with
other representations of internal structures, learning to differentiate between 'fact' and
'artifact', etc. Such experiential knowledge acquisition is the essence of craft skill, and
formed the basis of a 'working' technology in each location.
However, the acquisition of skill and hands-on experience went hand-in-hand with the
emergence of a number of innovations in practice. Modifications in technique, in clinical
use, and in technological function can be seen to have emerged in various locations and at
various times. While the types oftinkering and tuning which went on in new centres such as
Aberdeen and Kirkcaldy may not have been guided by exactly the same motivations which
underpinned the work of Donald and his co-workers in the late 1950s and early 1960s, they
were nevertheless geared towards adaptation to make the technology perform, to make it
work. Thus while they may have been more limited in nature - technical modifications to
adapt an A-scope machine to perform two-dimensional imaging for example, or alterations
in technique to speed up image formation with a mobile fetus - they did nevertheless
120
represent new ways of performing ultrasound. Furthermore, while the Kretz-hybrid
constructed in Kirkcaldy may not have been replicated in other places or incorporated by
Kretz into their machine design, it was nevertheless an innovation born of diffusion. Such
innovations emerged from practice. It was actors' direct interactions with ultrasound in
varied new contexts that shaped their perceptions of it.
Overall therefore, the early diffusion of obstetric ultrasound did acquire a certain
momentum during the course of the late 1960s and early 1970s. This diffusion, however,
was about more than simply the uptake ofartifacts - it was also about the diffusion of ideas
and knowledge and the movement of people - operators and patients. Furthermore, the way
in which new actors were enrolled into obstetric ultrasound also varied - with a range of
motivations, circumstances and contingencies based in each new location contributing to
this. Thus the diffusion of obstetric ultrasound was a complex phenomenon. To reduce the
early commercial success of the Diasonograph to a single explanatory construct - such as
specialist interest, for example - obscures the emergent nature ofthe technology in practice
and the way in which workers' interactions with it opened up new and unexpected avenues
of development in technology and in medical practice, which then became new valued
qualities to influence later adopters. Thus the early diffusion of obstetric ultrasound was
inextricably bound with innovatory practices. For this reason diffusion should not be
regarded as either a separate process from innovation, or as the final stage of technological
development. 107 Rather, it marks the point at which a whole new set of actors in new
locations interact with technology and thus provide opportunities to shape it.
107 McKinlay, J.B., (1981), 'From "promising report" to "standard procedure": seven stages in the career ofa
Inedical innovation' Millbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, Vol. 59, No.3, pp.374-411.
121
Chapter 3
Motion in 'the mangle': contextualising choice and
technological change
122
The fate of facts and machines is in later users' hands; their
qualities are thus a consequence, not a cause, of a collective action.I
Introduction
From around 1976, the market for ultrasound equipment in Scotland began to change. New
machines manufactured by suppliers such as Siemens, Kretztechnik and Philips from
mainland Europe, ADR and Diasonics from the United States, and Toshiba and Aloka from
Japan began to appear in Scottish hospitals. By the beginning of the 1980s, Nuclear
Enterprises had lost their dominant position as the main supplier of ultrasound equipment as
a more open and competitive 'ultrasound market' began to emerge. Furthermore, the
number of machines being operated in individual hospitals - particularly in the large
research and teaching institutions - also began to increase. In the Queen Mother's Hospital,
for example, there were two machines in operation in 1976 - both manufactured by Nuclear
Enterprises. By 1983, however, there were eight machines in use, and only one of these was
a Nuclear Enterprises model?
Two developments in particular were associated with this shift in the nature of ultrasound's
diffusion. One was the increasing move towards the use of obstetric ultrasound for the
screening of all pregnancies. Such a strategy brought with it an obvious increase in the
number of cases being scanned and thus also in the demands being placed on each piece of
equipment. Furthermore, as with other screening strategies such as cervical smear testing,
the universal application of ultrasound involved a triage system, with anomalies and
problematic cases being followed up by yet more ultrasound examinations. Thus as the
workload increased, so did the demand for ultrasound equipment. However, given that the
introduction of universal screening policies was itself a fundamental transformation in the
delivery of obstetric ultrasound services, and was associated with many more issues than
simply technical changes in equipment, this aspect of the technology's development will be
I Latour, B., (1987), Science in Action, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., Appendix 2, p.259
2 From Fleming, J.E.E., Spencer, I.H. & Nicolson, M.A., (1997), '40 years of ultrasound', in Cockburn, F.,
(ed.), Advances in perinatal medicine: proceedings ofthe XVth Eurpoean Congress ofperinatal medicine
Glasgow, Parthenon Publishing Group, New York & London, pp.92-99.
123
examined in Chapter 4.
The second factor associated with the emergence of a more competitive ultrasound market
lay in the technical differences between the various machines on offer. The most significant
of these related to the way in which ultrasound images were created and displayed. Whereas
the Diasonograph design was used to create gradually a compound image in the form of a
static picture, the new models of ultrasound equipment which appeared in the mid 1970s
used a radically different approach. Known at the time as real-time (RT) or fast B-scan
equipment, these machines produced a virtually instantaneous image when the probe was
applied. Furthermore, the image was constantly renewed at a speed fast enough to display
motion. Thus, for example, the movement of the fetus could be directly observed on the
scan image simply by maintaining the probe's position over the fetal echoes.
There were, however, a number of different ways in which such moving, real-time images
could be created and displayed and different manufacturers specialised in one modality or
the other. These differences were associated with diversity in a number of technical features
from probe design to image display format. This in turn entailed that different RT imaging
modalities also competed with one another - as well as with static compound scanners.
During the late 1970s therefore, diversity and heterogeneity became a feature of ultrasound
teclmology with a number of different imaging modalities and machine designs competing
for market share. Thus, a period of heightened commercialism and commodification began
to appear in the diffusion of ultrasound - presenting hospital administrators and clinicians
with a large choice of technological options.
This chapter will trace the emergence ofRT imaging in Scotland by examining, firstly, the
various models on offer. What was different about each design in comparison to its
competitors? What were the perceived advantages and disadvantages of each? The chapter
will then go on to examine the introduction ofRT equipment in the case study hospitals.
What made particular models attractive and why were they chosen over their rivals?
Furthermore, were there any obvious differences in the way RT machines were used from
location to location? Were there also any obvious parallels and differences observable when
RT machines were compared to earlier forms of the technology?
124
In iilvestigating the introduction and uptake of RT ultrasound in different centres, it is
important to note that the changes associated with the new mode of imaging were not purely
technical. The production ofRT images was associated with a subtly different form of
activity. In other words, the practice of creating ultrasonic diagnostic images was itself
crucially changed in the overall reconfiguration of the technology. Once more, therefore, in
order to uncover the multifaceted aspects of technological change (i.e. its technical, social
and cognitive dimensions3
) it is useful to examine the technology 'in action,4. Such an
analysis also provides an account that highlights the heterogeneous ways in which this form
of imaging was accommodated at the local level. The development of RT scanning will thus
be observed through a bifocal lens, which simultaneously examines both the impact ofRT
equipment on local practices, and the way in which the technology was moulded by local
circumstances. In other words, in what ways were the forms of technical agency captured in
RT scanners, and the forms of social agency and clinical arrangements which were in place
in different locations 'tuned' to accommodate one another? What expectations were placed
on the technology, what resistances (if any) arose to the fulfillment of those expectations
and how were these overcome or accommodated? To borrow Pickering's metaphor, what
effect did the introduction of moving RT imaging have on 'the mangle' of obstetric
ultrasound practices?5
It should also be noted that a large proportion of this chapter is based on oral testimony
collected from each case-study center. This evidence provides a large degree of detail - not
only relating to actors' perceptions of the new imaging modality, but also in relation to more
specific changes in practice, which rarely appear in the published literature of the time.
Furthermore, in using such sources, a window is provided which allows the historian to
glimpse into the varied motivations behind consumer choice in this context. Why did real-
time scanning replace static B-mode ultrasound as the most popular form of ultrasound
imaging? Was the revolutionary motion displayed on the screen (,revolutionary' both in
terms of the rapid image renewal which made the appearance of movement possible, and in
terms of its radically different form of image display in comparison to earlier machines)
] See MacKenzie, D. & Wajcman, J., (eds.), (1985), The social shaping o(technology: how the refi'igerator
got its hum, Open UP, Milton Keynes, (editor's introduction).
4 Latour, B., (1987), Science in action.
5 Pickering, A., (1995), The mangle ofpractice: time, agency and science, Chicago University Press, Chicago,
pp.21-34.
125
more attractive to ultrasound workers than the wider and more detailed view provided by
Diasonograph-style equipment? Or were other aspects of the newer machines perceived to
be beneficial? To what extent were consumer choices conditioned by factors rooted in
specific locational contexts? The oral testimony used within this chapter enables consumer
choices and activities to be understood within the context of the circumstances, practices
and arrangements of each location. This evidence is supported, where possible, by other
primary sources, which either lend support to the oral evidence or add extra dimensions to
the overall account.
Theorising competing technologies and 'consumer choice'
The analysis of competing technological forms has a long history and has been approached
from a variety of perspectives. From the 1970s onwards a growing number of studies began
to emerge, particularly from Marxist scholars, which challenged the modernist discourse
that technological change could be explained solely through reference to increasing
technical superiority and knowledge.6
In their examination of the way in which non-
technical forces such as social relations affected technological change, many of these studies
paid increasing attention to the nature of relationships between producers of technology and
consumers, and paved the way for less passive accounts of the latter. Harry Braverman for
example, in his 'de-skilling' thesis, concluded that new workplace technologies (from the
motorised conveyor belts of Henry Ford's Detroit factory of the 1920s, to the word
processors of the modern office) were adopted specifically to achieve a social goal; the de-
skilling of labour and transferral of greater power to management.7
In this instance,
company owners and their management representatives made consumer decisions regarding
the purchase and implementation of technology on the basis of social interest and thus
helped to shape the development of workplace technology in their favour. In the wake of
Braverman's work, a whole host of labour process theorists examined the introduction of a
6 Rosenberg, N., (1982), Inside the black box: technology and economics, Cambridge UP, Cambridge; idem,
(1976), Perspectives on technology, Cambridge UP, Cambridge; Thompson, P., (1989), The nature ofwork:
an introduction to debates on the labour process, 211<1 edition, Macmillan, Basingstoke; Wood, S., (1982),
(ed.), The degradation ofwork? Skill, deskilling and the labour process, Hutchinson, London. See also
Broadberry, S. & De long, H., (2000), 'Technology and productivity in historical perspective: introduction'
European review ofeconomic histOlY, Vol. 4, No.2, pp. 115-119 and the collected works in MacKenzie, D. &
Wajcman, 1., (eds.), (1985), The social shaping oftechnology, (part 2, pp. 67-172).
7 Braverman, H., (1974), Labour and monopoly capital: the degradation ofwork il1 the twentieth century,
Monthly Review Press, New York.
126
variety of technologies from this perspective.8
In a similar vein, feminist authors such as Ann Oakley and Ruth Schwartz Cowan have
examined the influence of shifting gender power relations on the development of domestic,
household technologies.9
In these studies, consumer behaviour and choice was again located
within a wider network of social relations, which were used to explain why women as the
consumers of domestic technologies (or more accurately men, who as head of household
often made the final decision regarding large financial purchases) chose to buy domestic
appliances such as washing machines and vacuum cleaners.
Thus both the feminist critiques of domestic technology and the Marxist (and feminist)
critiques of workplace technology highlighted two salient features relating to the adoption of
new technologies. Firstly, they emphasised that consumers, or end-users, were not simply
the passive recipients of technological innovation. More significantly, they also note that
social aims and goals could potentially be a more powerful element in consumer decision-
making than technical efficiency or superiority. Nevertheless, while such studies helped to
provide an approach to technology that afforded a more active role for the purchasing
consumers, the often mono-causal relationships they identified are too generalised to fully
explain why certain technologies are chosen over others. There is also the danger of circular
reasoning and functionalism here. Braverman, for example, is notorious for his reliance on
management material in the formation of his account. His conclusions regarding the effects
of the implementation of new technologies were thus extrapolated from management
sources that outlined their intention! As Juliet Webster notes in relation to the introduction
of information technology to secretarial work, intentions do not necessarily mirror
outcomes. 10
Similarly, from the other side of this relationship, there is the danger of
providing little more than a functional perspective if we deduce intentions from effects:
8In particular see, Rosenberg, N., (1976), Perspectives on technology; Thompson, P., (1989), The nature 0/
work; Wood, S., (1982), (ed.), The degradation o/work?
9 Oakley, A., (1985), Sociology o/housework: 2'N/ edition, Blackwell, Cambridge Mass.; Schwartz Cowan, R.,
(1983), More work/or mother: the ironies o/household technologyfi'0I11 the open hearth to the microwave,
Basic Books, New York; Wajcman, 1., (1991), 'Domestic technology: labour-saving or enslaving?' in
Wajcman, 1., Feminism confronts technology, Polity Press, Cambridge.
10 Webster, 1., (1985), 'Word processing and the secretarial labour process' in Purcell, K, (ed.), The changing
experience 0/employment, Macmillan, Basingstoke; idem., (1990), Office automation: the labour process and
,jiomens work il1 Britain, Harvester/Wheatsheaf, Hemel Hempstead.
127
teclmologies effectively de-skill workers, ergo that is why they were introduced. Such an
account presents an almost God-like role for the adopters of technology, who can accurately
foresee the exact outcome of their technological decision-making.
Another fruitful body of literature which examines how choices between different artifacts
are made can be found in studies of the marketing of consumer products.11 The power of
advertising and marketing (and, more recently, branding) in shaping consumer preferences
for one type of artifact over another has been examined from a variety of angles and with
widely divergent observations on the nature of the relationship between producer and
consumer. In essence, however, these studies have tended to fall into either of two separate
characterisations. In the first, consumers are characterised as 'dopes', passively absorbing
advertising rhetoric and using this as the basis for consumer decision-making. 12 Those
companies, therefore, who are most persuasive in their marketing strategies will be the most
influential in shaping consumer behaviour. In the second characterisation (associated with
more postmodern perspectives within sociology) consumers are instead 'cultural heroes' -
intelligent decision-makers whose ability to see past advertising rhetoric gives them a
stronger role in their relationship with producers.13 In this characterisation, companies must
compete with one another to draw the attention of the sceptical consumer. In the context of
new technologies therefore, potential purchasers are either easily persuaded through
advertising rhetoric to buy a particular artifact (the first scenario), or represent a powerful
social group exerting pressure on manufacturers to innovate technologies which will appeal
II Corrigan, P., (1997), The sociology ofconsumption: an introduction, Sage, London; Goldman, R. &
Papson, S., (1996), Sign wars: the cluttered landscape ofadvertising, Guilford Press, London and New York;
Jhally, S., (1990), The codes ofadvertising: fetishism and the political economy ofmeaning in the consumer
society, Routledge, London; Nava, M., (1997), Buy this book: studies in advertising and consumption,
Routledge, London; Sinclair, J., (1987), Images incOlporated: advertising as industlY and ideology, Croom
Helm, London; Sulkunen, P., (1997), (ed.), Constructing the new consumer society, Macmillan Press,
Houndmills.
12 See, for example, Klein, N., (2000), No logo, Flamingo, London; Jameson, F., (1984), 'Postmodernism or
the cultural logic oflate capitalism' New Left Review, Vol. 146, pp53-92; Adorno, T. & Horkheimer, M.,
(1972), Dialectic ofEnlightenment, Herder, New York.
13 Featherstone, M., (1992), Consumer culture andpostll1odernism, Sage, London; idem., (1990), 'Global
culture: an introduction' in Featherstone, M., (ed.), Global culture: nationalism,globalization and modernity,
Sage, London; idem., (1987), 'Lifestyle and consumer culture' Theol)), culture and society, Vol. 4, pp.55-70;
Tomlinson, A., (1990), 'Introduction: consumer culture and the aura of the commodity' in Tomlinson, A, (ed.),
Consumption, identity and style: marketing, meaning and the packaging ofpleasure, Routledge, London,
pp.I-38.
128
to them (the second scenario).
Both of these characterisations are, however, far too simplistic and in reality the relationship
between producers and consumers of new technology probably lies somewhere between
these two extremes. Furthermore, this relationship will also itself be defined and shaped by
the technological product in question. While all technologies are not the same, neither are
all potential consumers. There are also problems associated with the very concept of the
'consumer' within the study of medical technologies such as ultrasound. As Jenny Stanton
has noted, in a slightly different discussion of the applicability of the concept of
'configured-user' within medicine, identifying who the'consumers' of medical technology
actually are is less than straightforward.14 If consumers are defined as those who purchase
ultrasound machines then the definition is already a complicated one: as outlined in the
previous chapter, machines may be purchased by hospitals, clinical departments, local
health authorities or government agencies. In addition, the finance itself may come from a
variety of sources such as government or research grants, or charitable donations. Further,
the decision-making process itself can be complex with various actors, representing
different departments and interests, negotiating the purchase of equipment. IS Finally, to
consume is also to use and thus the views and experiences of those who actually operate the
equipment can playa significant role in decisions relating to future purchases.
Nevertheless, while the concept of 'consumer' may be problematic in its application to this
technology, it remains a useful tool in the examination of choice within the context of
competing technological designs and models. Thus, if the adopters of ultrasound equipment
can be characterised as consumers who are neither passive in the diffusion process, nor its
sole determinants, how exactly can they be perceived? An alternative approach is that
provided by the social construction of technology (SCOT) perspective. Indeed, the
development of RT scanning during the second half of the 1970s displays many similarities
with that of the bicycle, the main illustration used by Trevor Pinch and Weibe Bijker in their
classic early papers outlining this approach. For example, as in the development of the
14 Stanton, J.,(2002), 'Introduction: on theory and practice' in Stanton, J., (ed.), Innovations in health and
medicine: diffusion and resistance in the twentieth centlll),. Routledge, London, pp. 1-18.
15 See for example the negotiations outlined in Chapter 4 regarding the purchase of new equipment for The
Western Isles Health Board.
129
bicycle, a number of different forms of ultrasound imaging appeared around the same time,
each with sometimes subtly, sometimes dramatically, different design features and in a
situation where they competed with one another. 16 In Pinch and Bijker's study, subtle design
features were hotly contested and different 'relevant social groups' drew different meanings
from these various features. For the SCOT theorists, it was the outcome and resolution of
these divergent perspectives, or 'interpretations', which shaped the direction of further
research and the form of future design.
Within such an account therefore, 'consumers' are not simply regarded as the passive end
users or recipients of technology, but are instead subdivided into groups of actors who
influence technological change through the choices they make based upon their
interpretations of artifacts. Nevertheless, although Pinch and Bijker's 'relevant social
groups' are defined in relation to the technology (which presumably provides the yard stick
against which their 'relevance' is judged), little is said in terms of exactly how they form
their interpretations. One of the key characteristics that they stipulate to define 'relevant
social groups' is homogeneity of perspective. 17 In other words, all members must view the
technology in the same way. However, it is possible to suggest that a common view or
interpretation may be formed from a multitude of very different reasons and circumstances
and thus that homogeneity of perspective can mask heterogeneity of experience. For this
reason, while accounts such as that of Pinch and Bijker demonstrate the role played by
consumers and users in technological change, they do not pay adequate attention to the
manner in which interpretations are formed. To do this, it is essential to locate both actors
and machines within the historical and spatial context within which they interact.
There are, therefore, a number of precedents for analysing the influence of consumer choice
on technological development in the context of competing technological forms.
Nevertheless, while such studies may help explain why consumers buy the technologies they
do, they shed little light on the fate of those technologies once purchased. Consumers do
16 Pinch, T.J. & Bijker, W.E., (1987), 'The social construction of facts and artifacts: or how the sociology of
science and the sociology of technology might benefit each other' in Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, T.J.,
(eds), (1987), The social construction oftechnological systems, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass. See also Bijker,
W.E., (1995), Ofbicycles, bakelites and bulbs: toward a theOl)' ofsociotechnical change, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass., chapter 2.
17 Pinch, T.J. & Bijker, W.E., (1987), 'The social construction offacts and artifacts'.
130
not, after all, only purchase technological machines; they also use them. Thus the intentions
that may underlie the reasons for choosing a particular design may not be achieved in
practice. Furthermore, technologies may be used in ways that they were not necessarily
designed for. The purchase of a technology is after all only a small part of the relationship
between consumer and machine. In Paul Rosen's study of the development of the mountain
bike, for example, he notes the way in which one particular frame design (the Schwinn
Excelsior) was considered the most suited to a novel form of cycling activity which emerged
in California in the 1970s - riding down mountainsides at high speed. 18 The use of the
Schwinn frame in this manner W(lS essentially unpredictable, both for its original designers
in the 1930s and for those consumers who purchased it at that time. Furthermore, the degree
of direct technical rebuilding done on the Schwinn frame by the emergent 'mountain bikers'
to increase its suitability for this new pastime emphasises that end-users and consumers can
influence technological change in ways other than through their wallets.
Rosen's study further relates to a second gap in many studies of the consumer's role in
technological change. While many such studies have sought to locate consumer decision-
making within wider social relations and networks, much less attention has been paid to the
way in which local context affects this process. That is to say, macro-level analyses of why
social actors choose to adopt the technologies they do, have not been complimented by more
micro-level studies which look at decision-making and consumer choice within specific
historical and spatial contexts. Even Rosen's study, which notes the emergence of a new
'relevant social group' of mountain bikers in 1970s California, does not directly examine
what affect the locality itself played in the emergence of this new activity. Nevertheless, his
study provides evidence of a number of site-specific social and technical factors which
contributed to the emergence of the mountain bike - from the local terrain itself to the pick-
up trucks used to carry rider and bike up the steep hills in the first place. The development
of the mountain bike could thus be examined as the emergent outcome of the location-
specific interweaving of a number of social and material elements.
One way of conceptualising the role of local context is by adopting some of the theoretical
18 Rosen, P., (1993), 'The social construction of mountain bikes: technology and postmodernity in the cycle
industry', Social studies a/science, Vol. 23, pp. 479-513.
131
tools used in biological theories of evolution. A celiain degree of caution, however, should
be maintained when transferring conceptual tools from one distinct area of study to another.
As with technology transfer itself, the change in context can alter the dimensions and
characteristics of the tool in question. Nevertheless, there are precedents for such
developments (including the SCOT approachl9
) and celiain epistemological constructs
within evolutionary theory appear to lend themselves quite readily to the study of
technological change. Indeed, the SCOT concepts of technical change through 'an
alternation of variation and selection' are distinctly Darwinian. George Basalla, however, in
a wide ranging critique of theories of technological change predicated on 'technical
superiority' and 'Progress', provides a more focussed account of the applicability of
Darwinian ideas to explanations of technological diversity and change.2o
In his account, the
world of artifacts evolves as human ingenuity, goals and intentions interact with changing
social and cultural contexts. Thus as in Darwinian terms species evolve through their
interactions with one another in a given environment, so too do technologies. What is useful
about this idea is that the environment itself is changeable through its dialectic relationship
with the species within it, and thus the relative 'success' or 'failure' of an individual species
or mutation cannot be predicted. That is to say, the process of evolution is historically
contingent and emerges from a variety of factors. The implications of such an approach for
examining the history ofteclmology are obvious?1 Nevertheless, this type of theoretical
construct can only provide a limited metaphor for the complex and messy nature of
technological change. As Basalla himself notes, what distinguishes the evolution of species
from the evolution of man-made artifacts is that the latter are influenced by conscious,
wilful human action.22
Furthermore, this human action is goal-oriented and enacted in
specific historical and cultural settings.
Thus previous studies of competing technologies can provide points of comparison and
theoretical tools with which to study the development of scanning in the 1970s. What makes
19 Many of SCOT's theoretical constructs were adapted from those used within the sociology of scientific
knowledge. See Pinch, TJ. & Bijker, W.E., (1987), 'The social construction of facts and artifacts'.
20 Basalla, G., (1988), The evolution a/technology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
21 Other writers on technology have taken up this theme. See, for example, Mokyr, J., (1996), 'Evolution and
technological change: a new metaphor for economic history?' in Fox, R., (ed), Technological change,
Harwood Academic Publishers, Amsterdam, pp63-83.
22 Basalla, G., (1988), The evolution 0/technology, p.208.
132
the changes in scanning in this period more complex and interesting is that competition
between different technological forms occurred on three levels. On one level, there was the
competition between static B-mode scanners (i.e. the Diasonograph design) and the newly
emerging real-time machines as a collective group. However, there were also very
significant differences between the different types ofRT scanners and, importantly, different
companies coming into the ultrasound market from different backgrounds and routes,
tended to manufacture and supply only one of these forms. There was, therefore,
considerable competition in terms ofthe different methods of producing real-time images.
Finally, each company obviously produced different models, with subtly different features,
from their rivals and thus there was also competition between designs using the same
imaging method. All of these forms of competition coalesced during the mid to late 1970s,
to produce a time of rapid technical development. That is to say, the dynamic relationship
between innovation and diffusion became much more closely and immediately connected,
as well as being more obviously and identifiably related to the performance of different
design features and modalities atthe point of clinical practice. Furthermore, the very clearly
interwoven relationship between innovation and diffusion in terms of technical development
was mirrored in terms of clinical and cognitive developments: Here too it appears almost as
if events were speeded up - in a way eerily akin to the underlying principle of real-time
imaging itself.
In the following analysis of the uptake and use of new forms of ultrasound imaging in
Scotland, a conscious attempt will be made to highlight the way in which the choices made
between different designs can be contextualised by reference to local, site-specific factors.
Further, the chapter will also examine ultrasound workers' interactions with their new
machines within those same local contexts and thus will attempt to firmly place new forms
of ultrasound imaging within specific historical and spatial locations.
Competing modalities ofmoving images
Before examining the different forms of dedicated ultrasound equipment that emerged
during this period, it is important to note that Nuclear Enterprises B-scan equipment could
itself be used to create moving images. Dr Hugh Robinson, for example, began using a
standard Diasonograph to create moving images of the fetal heart in the early 1970s.
133
Robinson, like Campbell and Abdulla before him, became involved with obstetric
ultrasound at The Queen Mother's Hospital as part of his training and career development as
a clinician.23 The technique he developed made use of the A-scope probe of an NE41 02 to
first detect the fluttering spikes associated with the fetal heart, before switching the machine
to what was known as M-mode, or time-motion display. This type of display produced a
trace of moving structures - the baseline of echoes moved relatively slowly across the screen
and the fetal heart movements were visualised as a wave pattern. Thus by measuring the
number of waves displayed in any given time frame, the fetal hemi rate could be
determined. This information could then be used to assess fetal well being and detect
possible signs of fetal distress.
Prior to the work of Robinson, M-mode scanning itself had been more commonly used in
cardiological applications, although the first recorded use of this method to detect and trace
the fetal heart rate occurred in 1964 in China.24
Robinson's contribution was to adapt this
technique to the Diasonograph design. Without changing the set-up of the machine,
Robinson developed a different technique of using the probe which 'showed' the
movements ofthe beating heart.25
Essentially, therefore, Robinson's technique enabled
ultrasound equipment to operate as an ultrasonic fetal heart monitor, which could be used to
determine the pregnancy's on-going status (i.e. that the fetus had not died in utero) and to
detect 'fetal distress'. Figure 3.1 shows a static 'snap-shot' of the type of image produced.
23 Robinson completed his MD at Glasgow University in 1978. Robinson, H.P., (1978), 'The evaluation of
early pregnancy and its complications by diagnostic ultrasound' MD thesis, (University of Glasgow).
24 This study was undertaken by Professor Xin-Fang Wang and his team of co-workers from the Wahun
Ultrasound Research Group, and was published in the Chinese Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology (,The
application of ultrasound in pregnancy - the study of the fetal heart') in 1964. See Woo, J., (accessed 14/2/00)
A short histOlY ofultrasound in obstetrics and gynaecology, Part 2, http://www.ob-
ultrasound.net/history2.html
25 See Robinson, H.P., (1972), 'Detection offetal heart movement in first trimester pregnancy using pulsed
sonar' BMJ, Vol. 25, No.4, pp. 466-8; Robinson, H.P., (1973), 'Early detection of fetal heart movement by
sonar' Ultrasonics, Vol. 11, No.2, pp. 52-4; Robinson, H.P. & Shaw-Dunn, J., (1973), 'Fetal heart rates as
determined by sonar in early pregnancy' Journal ofobstetrics and gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth,
Vol. 80, No.9, pp. 805-9.
134
Figure 3.1: An early M-Mode display
(from Woo, l, (accessed 14/2/00), A short histOlY a/ultrasound, part 2)
Another technique for representing movement which developed in the Queen Mother's
involved rapidly 'twiddling' a B-scan probe. A number of the hospital's ultrasound
operators in the mid 1970s (including Hugh Robinson) employed this technique, while those
from other centres recall observing it in practice:
a girl called Valerie Hood [...] was a senior registrar doing scanning at
the Queen Mother's and she developed a system where you had a
single transducer and she would make it vibrate and I remember
watching her wiggle it backwards and forwards and by making it go
backwards and forwards quite quickly you got the impression of real-
time.
26
However, despite the fact that other actors observed both these techniques at the time, and
that Robinson's work with M-mode was published in the journals used by obstetric
ultrasound workers, neither practice was put into use in other Scottish centres. Part of the
reason for this lack of diffusion can be attributed to the fact that the level of skill associated
was difficult to transfer and perhaps reproduce. With M-mode fetal heart tracing, the
operator needed to be adept enough with the machine to locate the heart in the first place.
Then, once the machine was beginning to trace out the heart rate, the operator had to
maintain the position of the probe over the heart - not a particularly simple task with a
mobile fetus. The 'twiddle' technique similarly required substantial skill to keep the probe
moving at considerable speed without losing contact with the abdominal surface. Thus the
level of skill and experience demanded by these techniques helped to limit their diffusion in
those centres who were only beginning their involvement with the technology.
26 Interview with Dr Jack Crichton, 09/02/98.
135
Furthermore, the arrival of dedicated RT machines and transducers effectively replaced both
techniques. With an RT machine, the moving fetus could be viewed without the need to
manipulate the transducer and the beating heart could be directly observed. RT machines
thus represented a much more complex technology which was, however, easier to use. In
this way, many of the skills required ofthe operator to perform this type of examination
were 'delegated,27 to the technical capabilities of the equipment. This, however, raises
another noteworthy point. Although Robinson's M-mode trace required substantial skill and
expertise, it nevertheless produced what could be termed 'objective' data, i.e. a continuous
stream of information from which a precise heart rate could be calculated. RT machines, on
the other hand, were used to provide a more 'subjective' assessment of fetal heart activity.
Although the heart could be directly viewed, it was virtually impossible to accurately
'measure' a precise heart rate from observing the very rapid, fluttering movements of so
small a structure. Furthermore, early RT machines had no means to record the images for
later analysis. Thus assessments of 'normal' and 'abnormal' heart movements were made
largely on the basis of tacit knowledge acquired from experience. In this instance, therefore,
a more 'objective' measurement of fetal heart activity was essentially replaced by a more
subjective one.
To recap, the 'twiddle technique' and M-mode scanning emerged from adaptation in the
way in which a conventional static scanner was used in order to gain a different kind of
information. In this way, it was the operator's interaction with the machine (the technique)
which was altered rather than the make-up of the equipment itself. It could be argued, then,
that such representations of movement were the product of the research culture of the Queen
Mother's itself. This culture, centred as it was on the Diasonograph and dominated by
techniques of static scanning, led to extensions of existing features of that culture. In other
words, the type of research being conducted in the Queen Mother's followed a certain path
or trajectory which was influenced by the considerable experience which had accumulated
around static B-mode scanners.
27 Latour, B., (1992), 'Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few mundane artifacts' in Bijker,
W.E. & Law, J., (eds.), Shaping technology/building society: studies in socia-technical change, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass, pp225-58.
136
Thus, the first forays into real-time which were made by prominent Scottish actors in the
field involved adapting the technique of scanning in order that motion could be represented
using existing B-scan equipment. However, during the second half of the 1970s an
alternative way to represent movement appeared in the shape of dedicated RT scanners,
which involved a radical re-conceptualisation ofthe way in which ultrasound images could
be constructed and presented. In other words, RT images were achieved through technical
reconfiguration. Nevertheless, modifications to the technical dimensions ofultrasound also
went hand in hand with modifications of the performance of scanning.
Initially the most successful form of RT scanner (in terms of its uptake in Scottish hospitals)
was the linear array. In 1965, Werner Buschmann in association with Kretztechnik
developed a linear array with a curved surface?8 This transducer was designed for use in
ophthalmology, and had an array small enough to be fitted directly over the surface of the
eye. However, it is Professor Nicolaas Bom who is widely accredited with being the main
innovator of this type of scanning, developing a machine in Holland for cardiographic
applications?9 Bom's original scanner made use of a long, hand-held, probe with 20
individual crystal elements each of which, in sequence, would transmit and receive a pulse
of ultrasound. This created a scan frame of 20 vertical lines which was renewed at a rate of
190 frames per second. Electronic circuit boards located at the back of the unit controlled
the sequential firing of each element in the array. It was the speed of the renewing scan
frame which created the cine-film effect allowing motion to be represented.
28 His earliest publications in the English language were: Buschmann, W.H., (1966), 'Diagnostic
ultrasonography in ophthalmology' Journal ofthe All-India ophthalmological society, Vol. 14, No.3, pp.105-
16; Buschmann, W. & Hauff, D., (1967), 'Results of diagnostic ultrasonography in ophthalmology' American
journal ofophthalmology, Vol. 63, No.5, pp.926-33. See also Woo, 1., (accessed 10/9/02), A short histOl)) of
ultrasound, part 2.
29 His first publication appeared in 1971, Born, N., Lancee, c.T., Honkoop, 1., Hugenholtz, P.G., (1971),
'Ultrasonic viewer for cross-sectional analysis of moving cardiac structures' Biomedical engineering, Vol. 6,
pp.500-503.
137
Figure 3.2: Born's original linear array transducer
(from Woo, J., (accessed 14/2/00), A short history a/ultrasound, part 2)
However, it is important to note that the representation of motion was not the initial aim of
this type of scanning. Rather, the main research problematic underlying the development of
the linear array, was to find a way to create two-dimensional images of the adult heart.
Conventional static B-scan equipment was not ideally suited for this part of the body: the
spaces between the bones of the rib-cage allowed only very narrow 'windows' through
which to access the heart while the characteristic long sweeping action used to construct
compound static images were also impeded by these bony masses. Furthermore, the close
proximity of the air filled lungs (and their regular motion) disrupted the clarity of the slowly
constructed static images. Thus the Diasonograph (designed as it was to image the large
abdominal area) was ill-suited to scan this part of the body. The linear array was conceived
with these problems in mind: the presence of multiple elements in a straight-line probe
meant that the transducer did not have to be swept over the body, could fit between the ribs
and could generate images fast enough to overcome the problem of artifacts arising from the
motion of heart and lungs. However, the emergent outcome of this design and its speed of
image construction was that this type of machine was able to represent motion.
Furthermore, due to the fact that this system did not produce compound sector scans but a
single sector from a single angle, it did not require the large gantry associated with the
Diasonograph. Each scan frame was constructed from an array of transducers at fixed
distances from one another and in a straight line, therefore the relative position of each line
on the display corresponded with the distance between each element in the array. Thus
images could be achieved seemingly instantaneously and by applying the probe directly onto
the patient by hand. These characteristics, as will become evident, turned out to be highly
significant in the success of this form of imaging in obstetrics.
138
It is telling that the most dramatic way in which Born's findings were diffused was not
through his journal publications but through demonstration of his images. The following
comments, for example, relate to the recollections of Dr Tony Whittingham30
(who played a
significant role in the later development of linear array scanners in the UK) on first seeing
Born's scan images of the adult heart:
I think it was in 1971 that I was at a meeting of the British Medical
Ultrasound Society in Glasgow. Born was unable to attend to present
his work, but he sent a film. I remember to this day the excitement
when the film was shown of his 20-line image. The audience stood up
and applauded the celluloid, because Born wasn't there to receive the
accolade himself?!
There is reason to suggest that the powerful impact of moving images (unrelated to
the quality of the diagnostic image contained within them) was one ofthe technical
qualities of this form of scanning which created a great deal of the impetus to its
future development within obstetrics. The fact that they could produce moving two-
dimensional images of hidden bodily structures had, it could be argued, an immediate
appeal beyond the clinical. Never before had the possibility existed to observe the
fetus in utero - to watch its movements and activities in an instantaneous moving
image. The next step (as Tony Whittingham was quick to realise) was to improve the
resolution to a level at which they could display diagnostic information.
There is some controversy over which company was first to introduce this type of scanner
on a commercial basis with the credit going either to Organon Technica (who collaborated
with Born on the early innovation of the linear array) or to the American company ADR
30 Dr Tony Whittingham was a medical physicist, and Head of the Ultrasonics Section of the Northern
Regional Medical Physics Department at Newcastle General Hospital from 1972. Much of Whittingham's work
in the early 1970s concentrated on ways to introduce more scan lines into the RT image. See Tansey, E.M. &
Christie, D.A., (eds.), (2000), Wellcome witnesses to twentieth centlll}'lI1edicine, Vol 5. Looking at the
unborn: historical aspects ofobstetric ultrasound. Wellcome Trust, London, p. 38, footnote 98.
31 Tansey, E.M. & Christie, D.A., (eds.), (2000), Looking at the unborn, p 39.
139
(Advanced Diagnostic Research Corporation) based in Arizona?2 Nevertheless one of the
first companies to produce this type of RT equipment in the UK was Diagnostic Sonar, a
small Scottish company based in Livingston. More importantly, this company was initially
the most successful supplier of RT machines to hospitals in Scotland. For example, three
out of the four hospitals in this study acquired early machines from this company in the late
1970s.33
Diagnostic Sonar's original model was the' System 85', so-called because the
transducer contained 85 individual transducer elements?4 The scanner itself weighed around
32 kilograms, and was thus significantly smaller and lighter than static B-scan equipment.
The transducer was located at the end of a long, flexible (although apparently somewhat
unwieldy35) cable attached at the rear of the machine.
Figures 3.3 & 3.4: The Diagnostic Sonar 'System 85' and an example scan image of a fetal head
(both pictures cOUltesy of Blackwell, RJ., (1980), 'The basic physical principles of real-time ultrasound
scanning,' in Bennett, MJ., & Campbell, S., (eds.), Real-time ultrasound in obstetrics, Blackwell Scientific
Publications, Oxford, London & Edinburgh, p.3)
Two former Nuclear Enterprises workers; Duncan Cairns, a design engineer and Hans
32 Actors involved with ultrasound during the 1960s and '70s diverge on which ofthese companies' linear
arrays preceded the other. There was also another early British development by GEC Medical called RITA
(real-time imaging transducer array) - a linear probe which could be attached to existing B-scan equipment and
some actors claim this to be the first. (See Tansey, E.M. & Christie, D.A., (eds.), (2000), Looking at the
unborn, pp.60-61.
33 The only case-study hospital which did not acquire this make ofmachine was Aberdeen Maternity Hospital.
However, as will be highlighted in the next section, Aberdeen did not develop its ultrasound services to any
significant extent during the 1970s and did not actually purchase an RT machine until 1980.
34 John Fleming recalls that the name emerged during a demonstration of the prototype at the Queen Mother's
Hospital, following a discussion between himself and the two company directors. (Interview with John
Fleming, September 1998).
35 'Evaluation of real-time ultrasonic scanners - first report' Health equipment in/ormation, No. 81, August
1979, (BMUS Historical Collection).
140
Gassert, an NE salesman, formed Diagnostic Sonar. Gassert and Cairns regarded the
developments on the Continent in RT imaging as the next developmental stage in scanning
and tried to persuade Nuclear Enterprises to invest in research and development in this area.
Nuclear Enterprises, however, were not interested in doing so. Much of the explanation for
this undoubtedly lies with the economic costs of research and development - a relatively
small company division, the NE ultrasound division was only just receiving the return on
the investment it had made into static scanning, and thus were reticent to channel those
profits into the development of a different form of the technology. Furthermore, it is also
possible to suggest that Nuclear Enterprises were confident in the superiority of their form
of ultrasound imaging. The images created using linear array equipment were small, fuzzy
and the structures contained within them difficult to discern, in comparison to the clearer,
more detailed and panoramic views provided by static B-scan equipment. However, as both
Ruth Schwartz Cowan and David Noble (amongst others) have demonstrated, technological
superiority does not guarantee survival.36
Gassert and Cairns, convinced that RT would be the major growth area in the next few
years, left NE in 1975 to start their own company in the early part of 1976 with very humble
beginnings - renting a house in Livingston and using the kitchen as a lab.37
Although outside
the remit of this thesis, it is poignant to note that the difficulties faced by small companies
such as Diagnostic Sonar in innovating new products were indicative of the UK's poor state
support for innovation and research and development at this time.38
The result, in terms of
the expansion of the market in ultrasound equipment during this period, was that very few
British companies emerged with competitive products, and fewer still survived into the
1980s.
The development oflinear array RT scanning probes in the mid 1970s did eventually
stimulate varying degrees of response from manufacturers of static B-scan equipment.
36 Schwartz Cowan, R., (1985), 'How the refrigerator got its hum' in MacKenzie, D. & Wajcman, 1., (eds.),
The social shaping a/technology: how (he refi'igerator got its hUIIl, Open UP, Milton Keynes, pp202-218;
Noble, D., (1985), 'Social choice in machine design: the case of automatically controlled machine tools' in
MacKenzie, D. & Wajcman, J., (eds.), The social shaping a/technology, pp. 109-124.
37 Interview with John Fleming, September 1998.
38 Edgerton, D., (1996), Science, technology and the British industrial 'decline', J870-1970, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge; Lundvall, B., (ed.), (1995), National systems a/innovation: towards a theOlY of'
innovation and interactive leaming, Pinter, London.
141
Norman McDicken, who had moved to Edinburgh University in 1974 from the Department
of Clinical Physics and Bioengineering in Glasgow, developed a mechanical scanning probe
that could be used on the Diasonograph. His main research interest at this time was geared
towards the improvement of the quality of B-scan images by developing their grey-scale
resolution. Grey scale or dynamic ranging was developed by Kossoff in Australia, and was
essentially a technical improvement to increase image resolution by enabling weaker echoes
to be imaged without distorting stronger ones.39
In effect, grey scale enabled greater tissue
characterisation to be displayed as a result of the way in which each 'dot' on the screen was
represented. To improve the grey-scale capabilities ofNuclear Enterprises machines,
McDicken concentrated on the quality of the materials used to create transducer elements.
Thus ultrasound workers such as McDicken were actively engaged in improving the image
quality of static B-scan equipment when RT machines appeared. This in turn had a
tangential effect on some of those workers' impressions of early RT images. As they were
actively engaged in improving the amount of detail they could gain from weaker echoes,
their criticism focused on the poorer quality of the RT pictures, leading to an under
appreciation of the importance of RT's other contribution - the representation of
movement.40
Nevertheless, when the linear arrays appeared, McDicken felt that with the quality of
transducers they had for the Diasonograph, they could perhaps get better RT images than
those on offer if they could have them move fast enough. The Edinburgh team therefore
placed four transducers on a wheel, with the face of each transducer lying flush with the
wheel's edge, creating a seamless surface. The whole assembly would spin round, with each
transducer being energised to emit ultrasound pulses and receive back the echoes as it swept
round in the lower half of the wheel's rotation.
39 See, for example, Kossoff, G., Garrett, W.J. & Radovanovich, G., (1973), 'Grey scale echography in
obstetrics and gynaecology' Australasian Radiology, Vol. IS, pp.62-111. See also Wells, P.N., (1975),
'Review: absorption and dispersion of ultrasound in biological tissue' Ultrasound in medicine and biology,
Vol. I, No.4, pp.369-76; Wells, P.N., Halliwell, M. & Mountford, R.A., (1974), 'A method of display
dynamic range expansion using system gain wobbulation' Ultrasound in medicine and biology, Vol. 1, No.2,
pp.179-S1.
40 See for example Tom Brown's comments in Tansey, E.M. & Christie, D.A., (eds.), (2000), Looking at the
unborn, p42.
142
Figure 3.5: A diagram representing the operation of the EMI 'Spinner'
(from Blackwell, RJ., (1980), 'The basic physical principles of real-time,' p.23)
Unlike the linear array, the different angles of the transducers as they rotated around the
wheel gave the resultant image display a characteristic 'pie' or 'fan' shape (see figure 3.6
which shows an image of an 18 week fetus facing the placenta).
Figure 3.6: Image of fetal head created by EMI 'Spinner'
(From Blackwell, RJ., (1980), 'The basic physical principles of real-time,' p.23.)
McDicken and his team sold their spinner to Electrical and Musical Instruments (EMI) in
1977, shortly after that company had taken over Nuclear Enterprises. Thus with an NE (or
EMI) machine, ultrasound operators could have both high quality static B-scans and an RT
probe.
When examining the development of the 'spinner' in the mid 1970s there is a temptation to
relate it to a much earlier design ofRT scanner, which was commercially produced by
Siemens in the mid 1960s, and attribute a straight developmental trajectory between the
two. In reality, however, the similarities between the two imaging methods provide more
evidence of the heterogeneity of technical development, rather than an example of a single
143
'technological trajectory'. The Siemens 'Vidoson' worked on the principle of a single
crystal element that rotated at the focus of a parabolic mirror.41
Both element and mirror
were housed inside a water bath with a thin membrane, which would be coupled to the
patient's abdomen with oil or gel. As it rotated, the transducer would emit pulses of
ultrasound which would be reflected by the acoustic mirror, and into the patient (see Figure
3.7). Thus, despite the rotation of the element, the ultrasonic waves would enter the patient
in parallel lines and the resultant echoes would return in the same form. Figure 3.8 shows a
typical image created by the original Vidoson, this example being of a fetal face and head.
Figures 3.7 & 3.8: Diagram representing operation of Siemens Vidoson, and image of fetal face and
head
(Fig 3.7 from McDicken, W.N., (1976), Diagnostic ultrasonics: Principles and lIses 0/instruments, Granada
Publishing Ltd, London; Fig 3.8 from Woo, 1., (accessed 14/2/00), A short histDl)' o/ultrasound, part 2.
The 'Spinner', like the Vidoson and unlike the linear array design, also created moving
images through the motion of the elements themselves, although the former used a number
of transducers rather than the single element of the Vidoson. Indeed, both designs became
known as 'mechanical sector scanners' because it was the actual mechanical movement of
the elements which created the image, rather than electronic sequential firing as with the
linear array design. Thus it might appear tempting to reintroduce the Vidoson as the
predecessor of the spinner and thus create a more tidy and linear developmental trajectory
for the rotating head type scanner. The situation, however, is more complex than this would
41 For a more detailed account ofthe physical principles ofRT scanning see McDicken, W.N., (1976),
Diagnostic ultrasonics: Principles and uses 0/instruments, Granada Publishing Ltd, London pp 196-97 & 209-
215; Blackwell, R.J., (1980), 'The basic physical principles of real-time ultrasound scanning' in Bennett, M.J.,
& Campbell, S., (eds.), Real-time ultrasound in obstetrics, Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, London
& Edinburgh, ppl-26; Woo, J., (accessed 1412100), A short history o/ultrasound in obstetrics and
gynaecology, Part 2, http://www.ob-ultrasound.netlhistory2.html
144
make it appear.42
McDicken and his team did not modify the Vidoson or use the teclmical
development of the Vidoson as their starting point: Rather, they proceeded from a different
socio-technical culture - the technical developments of grey-scale and dynamic ranging with
the static B-scanner, coupled with the desire to create moving real-time images of better
quality than the linear arrays. Thus, the fact that parallels can be drawn between the Vidoson
and the EMI spinner, further demonstrates the way in which the developments of a scientific
and technological culture interact with, and are extended by, new and old forms of technical
design. The Vidoson only became drawn into the story of the development of scanning in
Scotland when a new set of circumstances had arisen. Thus the temptation to 'tidy up' the
account ofthe innovation of real-time scanners by obscuring the heterogeneity of their
development should be avoided.43
Indeed, it is worth noting that despite the fact that the Vidoson was the first commercially
available RT scanner, and that it was fairly widely used in Europe in the late 1960s, it was
never installed in a UK hospital. A number of factors can help explain this relative lack of
commercial success. Firstly, as Chapter 2 demonstrated, the uptake ofthe Scottish designed
Diasonograph did not itself occur until the late 1960s and thus knowledge of ultrasound's
potential uses within obstetrics during this period was only just becoming more widespread.
Thus the relative youth of the medical ultrasound market and the relatively small number of
hospitals who acquired machines during these years, provided little incentive for Siemens to
invest in any supply-push marketing of its product.44
Furthermore, the interest that was beginning to emerge in Scotland was centred on
gynaecological and obstetric applications, following the work of Donald and the Glasgow
group. In terms of this area of medicine, the ability of the Diasonograph to image the entire
abdominal area was of more immediate advantage than the moving images of a smaller area
produced by the Vidoson. Nevertheless, the technical differences between the two designs
cannot alone shed light on the Vidoson's fate in Scotland: it was, after all, used quite widely
in other countries for obstetric applications.
42 For a good account of the theoretical benefits of using non-linear developmental models see Bijker, W.E.,
(1995), Ofbicycles, bakelites and bulbs.
43 An example of such 'abridged' versions of development can be found in Blackwell, R.J., (1980), 'The basic
physical principles of real-time ultrasound scanning'.
44 John Fleming, pel's comm.
145
One important factor must surely be the strong inter-personal connections between
clinicians active in the field in Scotland and their relationship with the Glasgow team and
Smith's IndustrieslNuclear Enterprises. The role of actors such as Ian Donald, Stuart
Campbell, Norman McDicken and Alexander (Sandy) Christie should not be
underestimated in the diffusion and spread of ultrasound scanning. It could be argued that
the Glasgow hospital had an institutional commitment to the Diasonograph which was, in a
sense, passed on to those around them - those with whom they worked, as well as those who
came to the Queen Mother's to learn the new technique.
Related to this, it is possible to argue that a considerable expertise was being established in
the UK around static scanning using the Diasonograph. An obstetrician or radiologist who
wanted to establish an ultrasound service in another part of Scotland could, if he chose a
Diasonograph, become part of a wider network of practitioners with whom he could
correspond for advice and technical/clinical support. In addition to this, the role of
Professor Lenihan's Clinical Physics Department in Glasgow, in terms of their services and
support for static scanning, also helped to glue together a network of actors clustered around
this innovation.
A variety of factors, therefore, probably contributed to the fact that the Vidoson was never a
commercial success in Scotland. Furthermore, the lack of a commercial market for the
Vidoson in the UK provides further evidence to support the contention that a whole range of
contextual and historically specific factors are implicated in the translation of new
innovations into successful commercial products. In other words it is neither the 'technical
superiority' nor the actions of interested parties which alone determine an artifact's fate, but
rather a more complex and messy variety of circumstances, activities and outcomes. For this
reason, the 'fate' of an artifact does lie in the hands oflater users45
, but it also importantly
lies in the general context within which those users operate, and the way in which this
context will affect the artifact cannot always be accurately predicted.
To sum up, new forms of ultrasound imaging began to appear in the second half of the
45 Latour, B., (1987), Science in action.
146
1970s in the form of linear array machines and the mounted spinning transducers. These
innovations evolved from within the context of different circumstances. The linear array
originated in the context of cardiology and ophthalmology, while the spinner emerged from
improved transducer design. For the first time in Scotland, hospitals and ultrasound operators
were faced with an array oftechnical choices - static or moving images, mechanical sector
scanners or linear arrays, Diagnostic Sonar, ADR or EMI? Given the different modalities of
producing RT images, and the fact that these were also competing with a more established form
of diagnostic ultrasound in the shape ofthe Diasonograph, what factors influenced the purchase
of individual machines? Why were certain models chosen over others and why were
relationships developed between certain clinical establishments and companies? In other words,
what 'consumer choices' were made and what role did such choices play in the further
development ofultrasound? In order to answer these questions, it is necessary to examine the
introduction ofRT ultrasound in Scottish hospitals and the early uses to which it was put.
First impressions in practice: using real-time ultrasound at the Queen Mother's and
Aberdeen Maternity Hospital
There is some degree of ambiguity relating to what type of RT machine was first introduced to
the Queen Mother's Hospital and when. In 1978 the hospital patiicipated in a multi-centre (and
multi-discipline) assessment trial of new RT equipment on behalf ofthe Scottish Home and
Health Depaliment (SHHD) and the Central Services Agency (CSA).45 During this assessment
a total of eight new machines was circulated around seven Scottish hospitals, the Department of
Clinical Physics and Bio-Engineering in Glasgow and the CSA in Edinburgh where they were
tested for (amongst other things) safety, technical performance and ease of use. At the end of
the trial, the machines were then distributed amongst the participating hospitals and thus the
Queen Mother's acquired two machines (a Roche Axiscan and a Diagnostic Sonar 'System 85')
in 1979. However, there is reason to suggest that the Queen Mother's had bought a Diagnostic
45 For the findings ofthe assessment see 'Evaluation of Real-time ultrasonic scanners - first report' Health
Equipment Information, No. 81, Aug 1979.
147
Sonar machine earlier than this - although the documentary evidence to support this is
somewhat scant.46
Beginning in the early 1980s (probably in response to the increasing number
of machines being used in the Queen Mother's) John Fleming began a file in which he recorded
details of machines and their location in the hospital.47 In this file, a Diagnostic Sonar'System
85' is recorded as having been installed in 1977178. The file also notes that it was 'probably'
acquired from an evaluation trial and purchased via the Medical Research Council.48 This entry
was not made at the time of the machine's acquisition, however, and the details of its purchase
and installation are sketchy in comparison to the other entries in the file, which record exact
purchase price, dates of installation and delivery.
This scanty evidence can be tentatively supported by a letter written by Hans Gassert (one of
the directors of Diagnostic Sonar) to John Fleming in the mid 1980s.49
In it (undoubtedly as
part of a subtle sales ploy) Gassert mentions that the Queen Mother's were Diagnostic Sonar's
first customer and the centre to which they sold their first machine. Furthermore, John Fleming
recalls Gassert and Duncan Cairns (Diagnostic Sonar's other director) bringing their prototype
machine to the Queen Mother's - probably to assess its use on obstetric patients.5o
This early
involvement may have led the Glasgow hospital to buy a machine at an early date. It is thus
possible to suggest strongly that the Queen Mother's was the first Scottish centre to purchase a
Diagnostic Sonar linear array real-time scanner and that this occurred around 1977178.
Nevertheless, in terms of routine clinical practice it would appear that the hospital continued to
rely solely upon its static compound B-scanners until at least 1979. Dr Margaret McNay, for
example, began working with ultrasound in the Queen Mother's in 1978 and recalls using only
46 None of the interviewees for the Glasgow case study could recall clearly what RT machine they first used.
47 Ultrasonic Equipment Index, BB4, (BMUS Historical Collection).
48 The entry also notes that the machine was later loaned to the Glasgow Veterinary School.
49 Letter from Hans Gassart to John Fleming, July 1983, BMUS Historical Collection, Manufacturers folder.
50 Indeed, according to both John Fleming and Charles Whitfield, Ian Donald in particular was very good at getting
machines from manufacturers on 'extended loan' - i.e. the QMH would agree to take the machine for a trial period
to assess its use, and then the company 'had to come looking for it to get it back' (Interview with Professor Charles
Whitfield, 24/8/99).
148
the static scanners initially.51 It is tempting to suggest that the machine was not at first used for
clinical work but only for research/assessment, and, indeed, in 1978 the Glasgow group
published a paper comparing BPD measurements done using real-time and static B-scan
equipment.52 Furthermore, it could be suggested that, while not put into daily clinical use in the
Queen Mother's itself, the scanner was still used for both research and clinical purposes in one
of the hospital's peripheral clinics. For example, John Fleming's 'Ultrasonic Equipment Index'
records that in 1980 the Diagnostic Sonar machine, which was acquired from the SHHD/CSA
trial, was updated using money from a project grant to assess the effectiveness of such a
machine in a clinic situated in a poor inner-city area.53 Its portability, its relatively low cost and
its ease of use would have made it suitable for such a purpose. Furthermore, it was quite
possible to support the idea that while a particular scanner may have been regarded as inferior
and of poorer quality compared to static compound scanning machines (and therefore
unsuitable for an important tertiary centre such as the Queen Mother's), that it was still
perfectly adequate for a smaller peripheral clinic. According to Margaret McNay, for example:
I used to think of it like cars - you get your Mini which is perfectly good
for getting you from A to B, and they are reliable, small, portable
equipment. Then you've got your Rolls Royce that can do everything.
But not every unit needs a Rolls Royce ... only half a dozen or so really
experienced units, of which the Queen Mother's was [one]. These units
need the very sophisticated, the Rolls Royce type equipment, but for the
vast majority of work the middle ofthe road scanner is more than
adequate and for outlying clinics, certain rural areas, etc., then your
Mini equivalent is quite adequate.54
51 Interview with Dr Margaret McNay, 05111197.
52 Adam, A.H., Robinson, H.P., Fleming, J.E.E., Hall, AJ., (1978), 'A comparison of biparietal diameter
measurements using a real-time scanner and a conventional scanner equipped with a coded cephalometry system'
British Journal a/Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Vol. 85, pp. 487-91.
53 The update was the addition of a freeze-frame facility costing 3000, and the research project title was
'Evaluation of routine ultrasound in detecting IUGR at peripheral antenatal clinics in socially disadvantaged areas'.
Ultrasonic Equipment Index, BB4, BMUS Historical Collection.
54 Interview with Dr Margaret McNay, 05/11197. The car metaphor appears very often when ultrasound workers try
to explain their equipment and the changes between them. Sandy Christie, John Fleming and Valerie Farr, for
example, all made use ofthis metaphor in explaining the differences between machines.
149
Thus the fact that the early RT machines were not regularly used for clinical practice in the
Queen Mother's itself does not necessarily suggest that the ultrasound workers in that institution
saw no value in the new forms of imaging. Further, McNay's comments might help to explain
the fact that although the Queen Mother's owned three RT scanners by 1979 (the two
Diagnostic Sonar machines and the Roche Axiscan), they nevertheless continued to rely on the
large static compound B-scanners for all oftheir clinical work.
Another possibility, however, was that the static scanner was, at the time, simply preferred
because of an institutional commitment to this form of imaging. By the mid 1970s the Queen
Mother's Hospital could be characterised as the centre point ofa large socio-technical web
based around the practice of compound static scanning. In 1976, for example, eight new B-scan
machines were installed in Scottish hospitals in Lanarkshire, Tayside, Fife, Greater Glasgow
and Grampian bringing the total number of B-scan machines now being used in Scotland to
thirty eight.55
Each new machine strengthened Glasgow's position as the centre of expertise in
this technology. For example, the ultrasound training courses offered by the Department of
Clinical Physics and Bioengineering, which began in 1970, proliferated substantially as
personnel from other hospitals sought expert training in the technology. By the middle of the
decade there were a number of courses on offer - geared as separate endeavours for clinicians
and technical staff. In November 1979, for example, courses in general ultrasound were
advertised in the BMUS Bulletin with a ten day course for clinicians and senior registrars, and a
five day course for radiographers on offer. Both these courses were run four times a year. 56 In
addition, the Queen Mother's also offered its own specialist 'ultrasound in obstetrics' courses,
open to all grades of staff and run three times a year.57 Furthermore, in its capacity as a regional
service, the Department of Clinical Physics and Bio-engineering continued with their
55 Scottish Home and Health Department, (1979), Report on the future development ofultrasound in Scotland,
unpublished report, p.9.
56 BMUS Bulletin, No 25, November 1979.
57 The QMH courses lasted 3 days and were operated twice a year. They also appear to have been largely open to
all grades of staff from clinicians to technicians and were, obviously, confined to obstetric applications (see BMUS
Bulletin, No 25, Nov 1979).
150
maintenance and servicing role for the ultrasound machines (of which there were 17 by 1976)
now scattered through the hospitals in Glasgow and the west of Scotland.58
The number of
cases referred to the Queen Mother's had also increased - with patients being sent from all over
Scotland, and occasionally also from England. In the Ultrasound Technology Centre based in
the hospital, Hugh Robinson and John Fleming continued to develop the hospital's research
output on static scanning - working on estimations of fetal weight using fetal measurements.59
Thus in terms of both research and clinical practice, the Glasgow hospital had established itself
as a centre of excellence in the area of compound scanning. Through these activities, building
on the work done by Donald over twenty years, the QMH had a demonstrable commitment to
static scanning. Thus, if there was to be any centre that might react negatively to the 'new kid
on the block' - i.e. real-time ultrasound - the Queen Mother's might be a likely candidate.
According to one prominent actor in the field, there was a general perception that this was
indeed the case, and that the ultrasound workers in the Queen Mother's were very cynical about
the potential ofthe new modalities.60
This impression, however, is contradicted by, amongst
others, John Fleming:
I think I was quite keen on it. I can't really remember what my reaction
was. It might have been a bit ofthe 'not invented here' feeling as well,
'I wish I'd thought ofthat first'. But Angus [Hall] and I weren't trying
to compete in that area.61
Neveliheless, Fleming also recalls that the resolution and small scan-frame size led many
workers in the field to either dismiss or resist the new machines:
58 Scottish Home and Health Department, (1979), Future development ofultrasound in Scotland, p.8.
59 For example, Fleming, l.E.E., Hall, AJ., Robinson, H.P., Wittman, B.K., (1978), 'Electronic area and perimeter
measurement of ultrasonic images' Journal ofClinical Ultrasound, Vol. 6, pp. 379-84.
60 Anon. pers. comm.(with respect to the wishes ofthe interviewee).
61 Interview with Mr John Fleming, 2019198.
151
Having got it I think people realised the limitations at that stage. The
pictures were pretty awful. '" You got a picture with a lot of lines, the
resolution was poor and you only got a picture of a section. With a
Diasonograph you could scan over the whole length of a very large lady
and get it all in one image so you could see the whole thing. So
confronted with a silly little image that wasn't very good, there was
quite a bit of resistance from some people.62
Thus from Fleming's recollections, it could probably be suggested that, rather than regarding
the new imaging technique with hostility, his response to the 'System 85' could be
characterised more correctly as 'ambivalent'. As an engineer he appreciated the ingenuity of
the linear array, but having worked with static scanners since 1962 he similarly recognised the
scanner's technical limitations. As a result of its reputation and experience with obstetric
ultrasound, the Queen Mother's ultrasound team scanned a large number of complicated cases
and pathologies referred from other hospitals. Thus the demands placed on ultrasound - in
terms ofthe image quality they desired - entailed that the inferiority ofthe early RT images in
comparison to those produced by static B-scan machines informed their impressions of the new
imaging modality.
Nevertheless, although the new RT machines may have produced images of poorer quality and
resolution, their ability to display motion could be viewed as an extremely important attribute,
although not necessarily for clinical reasons. For example, Ian Donald saw in real-time scanners
a way in which the power and immediacy of moving images could be used for anti-abortion
purposes. According to Donald's wife (Mrs Alix Donald):
62 Ibid.
In Dallas, Texas, Ian was shown the first real-time scanning machine
brought from Phoenix, Arizona, by some talented young men. Ian was,
of course, wildly excited.63
63 Tansey, E.M. & Christie, D.A., (eds.), (2000), Looking at the unborn, p. 70. The machine to which Mrs Donald
was referring was one ofthe first commercial linear arrays produced by ADR (Advanced Diagnostic Research
Corporation) in the US. Their first model appeared in 1974, although a more successful model was marketed in
1976. This later machine was probably the one Donald first saw.
152
Part ofthe reason for Donald's excitement lay in the potentially strong emotional connection
which could be made between women considering a termination of pregnancy and the fetus.
Thus during the late 1970s in the on-going campaign against the 1967 Abortion Act, Donald
used very early real-time images of first trimester pregnancies to demonstrate the 'humanity' of
the fetus. The following, for example, is part of a speech which Donald made to a lay anti-
abortion audience after showing a real-time film of a 12 week pregnancy:
Anybody who says this is not alive is talking through his neck. It is a
lie, which is intolerable and seeing is believing... And one ofthe things
that this film has done ifit has done nothing else, is to kill forever the
lie ofthe pro-abortion lobby that there's nothing there just a potential
human being ... That baby is as human as an old man ... the same
individual from conception to grave...[emphasis added]64
Thus, even for a clinician with a demonstrated commitment to the diagnostic use ofultrasonic
images, the clinical potential ofRT imaging alone was not its only quality. For Donald, RT's
ability to display the movements ofthe fetus strengthened his arguments in relation to fetal life
and personhood and this, in turn, shaped his perceptions of the technical attributes of this form
of equipment. Despite this enthusiasm, Donald's retirement from clinical practice in September
of 1976 meant that he did not playa significant role in the uptake and development of this type
of scanning in the Queen Mother's Hospital. Nevertheless, what is evident from this example is
that actors' perceptions of a new technical artifact may be shaped by a number of factors and
circumstances, which are perhaps not immediately obvious. In this example, Donald saw in the
moving images ofRT ultrasound a quality which would not have been immediately apparent
(or valued) by other clinicians who did not share his political views. Furthermore, the qualities
perceived by the innovators and manufacturers of a technology such as RT ultrasound might not
be identical to those perceived by later users.
64 From Nicolson, M., 'Ultrasound imaging and the anti-abortion debate: Ian Donald's clinical holism'
(unpublished paper).
153
Despite the fact that ultrasound workers in the Queen Mother's like John Fleming and Margaret
McNay were somewhat lukewarm in their perceptions of the early RT machines, there were
aspects of the technology which emerged as significant in the delivery of antenatal services.
The most obvious ofthese related to the way in which amniocenteses were performed. Since
the late 1960s, compound scanning had been used to 'guide' the practice of amniotic fluid
sampling.65
An examination would be performed to locate the placenta and fetus and then a
mark would be made on the patient's skin (usually a small 'x') to indicate where the needle
should be inserted. The main rationale behind the sonogram was to minimise the risk of gaining
what was termed a 'bloody tap' - an impure amniotic sample containing traces of blood from
contact with the placenta.66
Furthermore, piercing the placenta was thought to increase the risk
of spontaneous abortion as a result ofthe procedure - endangering both pregnant woman and
fetus.67
However, as the scan was often performed some hours before the actual amniocentesis
(in some cases the evening or day before), the ultrasonic findings could not be entirely relied
upon to provide a definitive location for the placenta at the time in which the procedure was to
be performed, let alone the mobile fetus.
68
In partiCUlar, an increase of fluid in the bladder
would often alter the position ofthe uterus and placenta. Thus amniocentesis, in the age of the
static scanner, required the use of ultrasound in conjunction with one ofthe techniques which in
other procedures (such as the estimation of fetal age) it had come to supersede - i.e. abdominal
palpation. Clinicians performing this test (and at this time amniocenteses were undertaken
almost exclusively by clinicians) still relied predominantly upon their clinical skills to locate
the fetus and placenta.
65 See, for example, Durtis, J.D., Cohen, W.N., Richerson, H.B., White, c.A., (1972), 'The importance of placental
localization preceding amniocentesis' Obstetrics and gynaec%gy, Vol. 40, No.2, pp. 194-8.
66 For assessments ofultrasound's success in preventing such occurrences see Kerenyi, T.D. & Walker, B., (1977),
'The preventability of "bloody taps" in second trimester amniocentesis by ultrasound scanning' Obstetrics and
gynaec%gy, Vol. 50, No.1, pp. 61-4.
67 See Harrison, R., Campbell, S. & Craft, 1., (1975), 'Risks offetomaternal hemorrhage resulting from
amniocentesis with and without ultrasound placental localization' Obstetrics and gynaec%gy, Vol. 46, No.4, pp.
389-9l.
68It is also worth noting that the scan was often undertaken in an entirely different location. In Kirkcaldy, for
example, prior to the opening ofthe ultrasound department at Forth Park, scans were performed at the Victoria
Hospital the day before an amniocentesis was carried out at the maternity.
154
Beginning in the early 1980s the Queen Mother's team were using real-time ultrasound during
the performance of amniocentesis - relying much more directly on the imaging technology to
guide their activity. Once again, however, the dialectics of resistance and accommodation came
into play in making this practice 'work'. Two technical resistances in particular were associated
with amniocenteses under direct ultrasound guidance. Firstly there was the problem of
maintaining an aseptic environment - both in terms ofthe actual point of contact between the
transducer and abdomen and in terms ofthe general suitability ofthe scan room. Ultrasound
was not initially developed to be used in conjunction with invasive procedures such as
amniocentesis and thus the need to maintain asepsis had never before been an issue. In some
centres, for example, it was felt that the scan room itself was inadequate for the performance of
such procedures and thus if the scanner was not a mobile unit, they continued to rely on
techniques ofpalpation (see the following section on Aberdeen). However, in other centres
such as the Queen Mother's, where it was felt the room could be made suitably sterile a
resistance remained in terms ofthe cleanliness of the equipment. Ultrasonic probes, for
example, had not been designed with ease of sterilisation in mind, while contact gels were all
initially non-sterile oils.
A range of strategies was developed to accommodation such resistances. In their 1983
publication Hobbins, Winsberg & Berkowitz, for example, advocated that most centres should
not attempt to use ultrasound to visualise the actual needle inseliion, but that, by placing their
finger beneath the part ofthe transducer which showed the optimal entry point, they should
create an acoustic shadow indicating the preferred angle, before marking the abdomen. The
scan image was then to be displayed on screen using a freeze-frame facility (which, of course,
again provided further avenues of innovation for ultrasound manufacturers). The amniocentesis
would then be performed using this frozen image to guide the needle insertion, but only after
the contact gel had been removed using acetone.69
For those centres who were in a position to
directly image the needle insertion, the transducer should be gas-sterilised or placed within a
69 Hobbins, le., Winsberg, F. & Berkowitz, R.L., (\983), Ultrasonography in obstetrics and gynaecology -
second edition, Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore & London, p. 174.
155
sterile plastic bag.70
At a later date, innovations began to appear from manufacturers of
ultrasound equipment and other medical suppliers in the form of contact gels aimed specifically
at the practice of invasive procedures using ultrasonography.71
Using these various accommodation strategies to overcome the need to protect the patient
against possible infection, RT ultrasound began to be used in conjunction with invasive
techniques such as this. Again it was real-time's fast speed and immediacy of image creation
which were the forms oftechnical agency harnessed and put to use during this activity.
Furthermore, for the purposes of amniocentesis, the linear array RT modality emerged as the
most practicable and useful. However, this was not as a result of anything integral to its method
of image creation - rather it was the fact that the linear arrays were all hand-held transducers
which was important. This enabled clinicians to have the freedom of movement to easily
position the transducer on any part ofthe abdomen in such a way that it could image the precise
area in which they were working but was convenient enough for them to be able to perform the
biopsy and manage the transducer. Thus again, a simple design feature emerged during this
form of practice to be an important advantage over its rivals.
This is not, of course, to argue that amniocenteses could not be carried out under the direction
of other types ofRT imaging, such as 'the Spinner'. Rather, the suggestion is simply that using
different machines with different characteristics meant that the operator in these circumstances
made slightly different movements and the procedure was performed in subtly different ways.
On the pari ofthe operator, a different type of interaction and behaviour was required to carry
out the test. With a linear array machine, the slightly clumsy transducer had to be operated with
one hand while the needle was guided into the uterus. This operation required a relatively high
degree of manual dexterity - two types oftechnique were applied simultaneously, and at the
70 Hobbins, J.e. et ai, (1983), Ultrasonography in obstetrics and gynaecology., p. 174
71 Indeed, the increasing use of ultrasound during such procedures helped to create a lucrative niche market in
products such as contact gels, with a proliferation of products designed with paIiicular forms of scanning in mind.
The emergence of this buoyant market can be easily seen in the advertisements in the BMUS Bulletins throughout
the 1980s.
156
same time the operator was required to keep an eye on the biopsy needle, as both a direct
physical presence and as an ultrasonic representation, as well as monitoring the reactions and
movements ofthe fetus. Thus the new interactive relationship between operator, ultrasound
equipment and biopsy needle became stabilised in a way which altered the practice of
amniocentesis.
Furthermore, this new form of practice also extended practitioners' conceptual knowledge of
tetallife. The simultaneous use ofultrasound imaging and a technique which introduced a
foreign body into the uterus, provided another opportunity to observe the actions and reactions
ofthe fetus during such circumstances.72
Once again, this extension of medical knowledge has
to be seen as an emergent outcome ofthe alteration in the practice of amniocentesis under
ultrasound guidance.
The changes which RT ultrasound facilitated in the performance of amniocenteses demonstrate
an important aspect ofhow perceptions ofthe qualities ofthe new machines were formed.
Whilst the poorer quality and smaller view provided by RT ultrasound led the machines to be
considered as inferior by the staff ofthe Queen Mother's, this perception was modified
somewhat when an alternative use was found for this equipment. While RT was considered
inferior for the detailed examination ofthe uterus and its contents (placentography, fetal
anomalies, etc.), the way in which it constructed and displayed images was considered
advantageous for invasive procedures. First impressions, therefore, did not dictate future usage.
As medical practices changed - through interactions with the technology and growing
familiarity - so too did perceptions of the qualities contained in this design. Thus what was
expected of such machines, what it was asked to do and how it was used did not remain static.
For this reason, the evolving nature of the context of ultrasound's usage influenced perceptions
of the technical design of different machines. An RT scanner considered as a direct alternative
72 See, for example, Gennser, G. & Marsal, K., (1979), 'Fetal breathing movements monitored by real-time 8-
mode ultrasound: basal appearance and response to challenges' Contributions in gynaecology and obstetrics, Vol.
6, pp. 66-79; Neldam, S. & Pedersen, J.F., (1980), 'Fetal heart rate response to amniocentesis in early pregnancy'
157
to a static B-scan machine was disappointing; one viewed as an aid for invasive procedures was
not.
From the early 1980s, therefore, these were the types of practices being carried out in the Queen
Mother's Hospital by the ultrasound team. Furthermore, during the mid 1980s other invasive
procedures such as chorionic villus sampling (CVS) and fetal blood transfusions also began to
be performed in conjunction with ultrasound. The fact that such activities became defining
features of ultrasound in this hospital, relates to the prominent position the Queen Mother's
staff had acquired over the previous 20 years as an important tertiary hospital and a centre of
expertise with this technology. This was not, however, simply based on a past reputation - their
prominent position gave them access to problematic cases through referrals from other centres,
thus giving them the opportunity to try out new procedures and increase their expertise in the
area. Furthermore, their closely intertwined roles as University Department and NHS service
gave them greater access to new equipment through their ability to draw on research grants.
Thus, the way in which RT ultrasound was received and implemented in the Queen Mother's
was largely shaped by the nature and position of the institution itself. Nevertheless, although
tempting, it is too simplistic to suggest that the same experiences were replicated in other,
similar institutions. To this end, it is worth briefly considering the reception and use of RT in
the other large tertiary centre in this study - Aberdeen Maternity Hospital. While actors in this
hospital shared many of the same perceptions of the new form of imaging with their
counterparts in Glasgow, the way in which this translated into their interactions with the
technology differed. In essence, RT received a lukewarm reception amongst the staff who
operated obstetric ultrasound in Aberdeen. In order to explain this, it is first necessary to
examine some ofthe events that occurred just prior to its introduction.
in the early 1970s a number of departmental shifts took place which altered the organisation of
the small ultrasound department. Initially, the original Nuclear Enterprises machine (and the
JOll/'l1a/ ofperinatal medicine, Vol. 8, No.4, pp. 209-12.
158
NE4102 which replaced it) was owned and run jointly by the Department of Medical Physics.73
However, in the mid 1970s (very much against the wishes ofthe Chair of Medical Physics,
Professor John Mallard) Dr Valerie Farr was placed in charge of the service. Although trained
as a paediatrician, Dr Farr first became involved with ultrasound in the late 1960s when she
headed the maternity hospital's intensive care unit. Much of her remit involved antenatal
monitoring, which brought her into contact with Alexander (Sandy) MacIntosh and Alexander
(Sandy) Christie's work with ultrasound. Her knowledge of the technology led to her
appointment to the Aberdeen ultrasound team following the departure of Sandy MacIntosh in
1970. According to Farr, she was the obvious choice and 'just drifted into it'.74
Placing a clinician such as FaIT in overall charge ofthe project, effectively laid control over the
use and future development ofthe technology firmly in the hands of clinicians, reducing the
role oftheir colleagues in Medical Physics. It would appear that the main rationale
underpinning this decision was a difference in focus and approach between the two specialties,
which is neatly summed up by John Mallard:
I always used to argue, 'How can we [medical physicists] know how to
improve this technique if we are not actually working with the patients
and seeing what we cannot image?' On the other hand, the medics
argue, 'We know all about anatomy, we know the condition that we
think the patient has and we know what to look for in the image to show
whether or not the patient has that condition.,75
Thus, by the middle ofthe 1970s it is possible to suggest that the Aberdeen obstetricians felt
that ultrasound should be centred more fully around patient care and use than technical
development and investigation. The technology had now been in use in the hospital for several
years and, arguably, it was now felt that an ultrasound-experienced clinician was better suited to
oversee its general use than a medical physicist, whose knowledge ofthe pathologies of
73 See Chapter 2.
74 Interview with Dr Valerie Farr, 10/05/98.
75 Interview with Professor John Mallard, 28/3/00.
159
pregnancy was confined to his or her knowledge of imaging techniques. Indeed, John Mallard's
perception was that this often occurred in the relationship between medical physics and new
technologies:
As the years go by, usually it's the physicists that develop the thing, set
it up, get it working, prove that it's clinically useful, and then gradually
they get pushed out as the medics and the radiographers etc. take over.
Then the physicist is the one that looks after the machine and repairs it.
It's a sad business.76
This lament, of course, does not strictly apply to the development of diagnostic ultrasound in
general, where the involvement of a number of clinicians such as Ian Donald was always
apparent. Nevertheless, in Mallard's opinion, this was exactly what occurred with obstetric
ultrasound in Aberdeen in the late 1970s, when the relationship between medical physics,
obstetrics and the ultrasound scanning service was reconfigured. Mallard's department,
however, continued their developmental work with ultrasound, but in areas other than obstetrics
and gynaecology. Thus, through the Department of Medical Physics, Aberdeen continued to
play host to developments in ultrasound and played an active role in assessments ofthe
potential of real-time scanning. Indeed Mallard's Department was one ofthe first European
centres to build a phased array transducer.77
On the other hand, however, the obstetric scanning
service based in the maternity hospital appears to have remained relatively unchanged
throughout the late 1970s and into the 1980s. The staff remained relatively small - one
secretary who would book-in patients and type up notes, Dr Farr and two assistants (one
medical technician and one radiographer). The department of Medical Physics which had
played such a pivotal role in the establishment ofultrasound in Aberdeen continued to provide
support for the maintenance and upkeep of the hospital's static scanners.
76 Interview with Professor John Mallard, 28/3/00.
77 Selby RDS, Hutchison JMS, Mallard JR, (1980) 'The Aberdeen phased array: A real-time ultrasonic scanner
with dynamic focus' Medicine and biological engineering and computing, Vol 18, pp. 335-343.
160
Nevertheless, the shifting relationship between ultrasound and medical physics was not the only
significant aspect of Farr's appointment. Unlike her predecessors, Val Farr was not an
enthusiastic supporter ofthe technology. Her perceptions of its limitations were integrated with
a general belief that medical technologies should be used to support clinical decisions, rather
than the reverse, which she saw as the overall reality. In 1973, for example, she collaborated on
a paper critical ofthe increasing reliance on measurements of biparietal diameter for calculating
gestational age,78 for which she received a few years of 'cold shoulder treatment' from
Professor Donald.79
In addition, she did not support the trend towards the use ofthe technology
for universal screening (see Chapter 4) and felt that even by the late 1970s there was something
of an over-reliance on the technology to the detriment of clinical diagnostic skill.
With a sceptic at the head of a virtually independent obstetric scanning team (whose only other
two operators were lower grade staff) it is perhaps unsurprising to find that the new imaging
modality of real-time was not received particularly enthusiastically. The first dedicated RT
machine to be used was a linear array costing 35 000, which was purchased in 1980.80
As
might be expected, Farr's first impressions ofthe new piece of equipment were not particularly
positive:
It was terrible. The pictures were no better than the Diasonograph. You
were used to the Diasonograph and knew what to expect and when you
get a new machine you don't know its limitations at al1.81
Neveliheless, these sentiments echo those expressed by actors such as John Fleming and
Margaret McNay at the Queen Mother's. The difference, however, lay in the way such
sentiments were translated into action. In the Queen Mother's, initial impressions ofRT were
78 Davison, 1.M., Lind, T., Farr, V., Whittingham, T.A., (1973), 'The limitations of ultrasonic fetal cephalometry'
Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth, Vol. 80, No.9, pp. 769-75.
79 Interview with Dr Valerie Farr, 10/5/98.
80 Unfortunately, it has proved impossible to trace the make and model ofthis first machine - although from Dr
Farr's description it was certainly a linear array.
S! Interview with Dr Valerie Farr, 10/5/98.
161
overcome as the potential benefits ofthe new equipment were investigated - from its uses in
small peripheral clinics, its ability to display fetal movements, and the advantages it provided in
terms of amniocenteses performed under direct ultrasound guidance. In Aberdeen, on the other
hand, negative first impressions led to inaction - staff continued to rely on their static B-scan
machine and when, eventually, they did begin to use the RT equipment, it was simply regarded
as another machine to be used in tandem. Amniocenteses, for example, continued to be
performed after ultrasound examination, rather than being guided by direct ultrasound
visualisation, and patients continued to be examined in the scan room, despite the RT machine's
ability to be used at the bedside. In other words, the particular benefits and advantages that RT
brought with it were not investigated, while its disadvantages continued to lead to its relegation
as a poor substitute for the static B-scan machine.
This raises the obvious question ofwhy the hospital would bother to spend 35000 on a
machine its own operators regarded as inferior. However, it is also possible to see here the
growing divide between the obstetric scanning team and the Department of Medical Physics.
The latter, in their role as the maintainers of, and expelis in, such pieces of medical equipment
had a strong voice in purchasing decisions. Their work on the development of phased arrays
demonstrates that they did not share the same perception ofRT as Farr and suggests that they
played a significant role in introducing this form of the technology to Aberdeen.
Furthermore, it would also seem that obstetric staff who were not themselves ultrasound users
were becoming more and more acquainted with the technology and its uses - mainly via the
medical journals. Indeed, Farr felt this led to a lack of awareness on the part of consultants in
respect ofthe equipment's limitations and capabilities:
It's like all new things. People don't publish the bad things - only the
good. Everybody's expectation is higher than what we can deliver. A lot
162
of time was spent educating the staff as to what we could and couldn't
do.82
Thus with both a Medical Physics department keen to try out and extend new developments in
ultrasound technology, and with a growing number ofthe hospitals obstetricians keen to
employ ultrasound assessments in their clinical decision-making, it was probably inevitable that
real-time ultrasound would arrive in Aberdeen, whatever the wishes of Val Farr.
To sum up, it is possible to discern that, initially, RT imaging in Aberdeen, while greeted with
some ambivalence on the part of its operators, was nevertheless gradually woven into the fabric
of the delivery of obstetric ultrasound - but without altering or extending its nature. The altered
relationship between medical physics and obstetric ultrasound, entailed that while research and
development ofRT was undertaken, it was done only by medical physics working in
conjunction with other specialties. In obstetrics, despite the department's early involvement
with the technology, ultrasound was in a sense reconfigured as a purely clinical service with no
research commitment. Even within this remit, the sceptical attitude ofthe team leader led to
little innovation in this direction once RT had been put into use. Although this scepticism
towards the usefulness of ultrasound conditioned her approach to the technology, it should be
viewed as an outcome of her interactions with it. In particular, it cannot be argued that FaIT's
attitude to ultrasound was the result of some prior and personal anti-technology sentiment. In
the 1960s, for example, she had been heavily involved in the practice of intrauterine blood
transfusions in rhesus cases - operated under x_ray.83 Her involvement in the development of
this very technologically invasive procedure demonstrates that she did not view medical
technology per se in the same way that she viewed ultrasound. This, therefore, strongly
suggests that her view of ultrasound was not the result of a reactionary/anti-technology stance,
but rather the result of her experience with ultrasound. In the case of ultrasound-guided
amniocentesis, for example, she did not feel that the image quality was sufficient, and saw little
82 ibid.
83 ibid.
163
advantage to be gained over the methods of abdominal palpation.84
Thus it would appear that
the new imaging modality ofRT was valued purely on the grounds that it was an additional
machine which could be used for clinical examinations. The new technology was simply
enveloped within the existing practice of obstetric ultrasound - bringing about no noticeable
change.85
In short, therefore, while there are many similarities between the Queen Mother's Hospital and
Aberdeen Maternity Hospital in terms of their size and institutional position, the use of new RT
scanners in each was markedly different. Nevertheless, this difference did not lie in either the
reasons that motivated each centre to purchase RT, or in initial assessments of its qualities.
Instead, what was different was the way in which the technology was actually used in practice
in each centre. In the Queen Mother's, the use ofthe machine altered perceptions of its
advantages, disadvantages and uses - in Aberdeen Maternity Hospital it reinforced an initial
negative assessment. If actors such as Farr, Fleming and McNay can be characterised as
'consumers' of obstetric ultrasound in this example, their 'consumer choices' were not the only
factors which shaped the general development ofthe technology in each centre. Of equal
significance were their subsequent interactions with the chosen artifact.
In addition, the difference in RT's reception between these two institutions can only be
understood by examining the technology in each individual local context. For example, the
close working relationship between clinically-trained ultrasound users and the Ultrasound
Technology Unit at the Queen Mother's meant that the clinical and technical qualities ofthe
new machine designs were examined collaboratively. At Aberdeen Maternity Hospital, on the
other hand, no such close collaboration existed. The small obstetric ultrasound team were
effectively distanced from the Department of Medical Physics - who provided only technical
84 ibid.
85 The role of ultrasound in obstetrics was re-evaluated in Aberdeen in the mid 1980s when a number of new, pro-
ultrasound, stafftook up prominent posts within the Obstetrics Department. The way in which this affected the
development of ultrasound is considered in Chapter 4.
164
'support'. The same culture therefore did not exist. Mal1ard and his staff worked in isolation on
the development of the technical aspects ofthe technology, while Farr and her small staff used
the new machines to keep up with increasing clinical demand. Thus despite the similarities
between the two institutions, the nature oftheir respective local research cultures and inter-
departmental relationships led to significant differences in the way new forms of imaging were
perceived and used.
Nevertheless, local context could also affect the technology in a much more direct manner. One
example ofthis can be found in the innovative way in which RT ultrasound was used in the
Western Isles to overcome difficulties associated with the social geography ofthe area. To this
end, the following section will examine the reception of RT ultrasound in the smallest and most
remote ofthe hospitals in this study - the Lewis Hospital in Stornoway.
Portability in tile peripllery: tile emergence ofa valued 'quality' in tile Western Isles
The Western Isles (or Outer Hebrides) are situated about thirty miles offthe West Coast of
Scotland. Basically a collection of islands, they cover a very large area, spread in an arc of
more than 150 miles in length. Outside of the largest town of Stornoway (on the Isle of Lewis)
the social geography ofthe isles is composed of small, scattered, remote communities. In 1978,
the entire population stood at 29,66586
and this figure only increased by around 1000 to 30,660
by 1990.87
The main clinical provider for the region was the Lewis Hospital in Stornoway, itself a
comparatively small district general hospital.88 For example, throughout the 1970s and '80s,
there was only one obstetric consultant based in the hospital, accompanied by a core staff of
86 Registrar General, (1980), Annual Report ofthe Registrar Generalfor Scotland, 1978, General Register Office,
Edinburgh.
87 Registrar General, (1991), Annual Report ofthe Registrar Generalfor Scotland, 1990, General Register Office,
Edinburgh.
88 In 1992, the hospital was relocated to new premises in the town and renamed the Western Isles Hospital.
165
only three midwives. However, it has to borne in mind that this small group of professionals
were dealing with a relatively low number of hospital births. Not all of the women of the Isles
were delivered in the hospital (many choosing to go to mainland hospitals or to be delivered at
home), while the small size of the population entailed a relatively low absolute number of
births (417 live births in 1978, declining steadily to 345 by 1990).89 Nevertheless, the absence
ofjunior doctors and the solitary nature ofthe clinician's post, did create organisational
resistances which effected the delivery of ultrasonic services - as will be outlined below.
In terms of pregnancy and childbirth, the organisation of hospital services in the Western Isles
Health Board area was rather unusual and complicated. The sheer size of the area and the
remoteness of its communities meant that for the women ofthe southern isles, it was as easy, if
not more so, to travel to one ofthe hospitals on the mainland, rather than the smaller hospital in
Stornoway. Furthermore, Loganair (who operated all flights between the isles) banned pregnant
women from using their services after 37 weeks gestation.90
Thus many women found
themselves having to travel to the area where they intended to be delivered weeks before the
baby was due. It was therefore, more sensible for them to be delivered in areas where they had
relatives, rather than travel to Stornoway and be accommodated in a bed-and-breakfast
establishment. For these reasons, the women ofthe Isles often opted to be delivered in various
mainland hospitals - mainly in Glasgow or Inverness, but also sometimes Aberdeen or
Edinburgh. This, then, entailed trips to the mainland for booking clinics, where many may have
received a routine ultrasound examination - ifthat was the policy of the particular hospital in
question. However, aside from these women, and others who were referred to the tertiary
centres of Glasgow, Edinburgh or Aberdeen with suspected anomalies or complications, the
majority of women in the Isles did not receive ultrasound as part of their antenatal care.
89 Registrar General, (1980), Annual report, 1978; idem., (1991), Annual report, 199().
90 Although, often with the complicity oftheir local GP, many women managed to 'manipulate' this regulation
(anon. pers. comm. - with respect to the wishes ofthe interviewee).
166
In 1979, the Lewis Hospital became another in the growing number of Scottish hospitals to
introduce an obstetric ultrasound service. The first piece of equipment to be purchased was a
linear array RT machine - a Diagnostic Sonar 'System 85'. The main influence on the
development of an obstetrics and gynaecology scanning service was the arrival at the Lewis
Hospital of Dr Jack Crichton in 1978. Crichton had previously been involved in the creation of
ultrasound scanning services in Perth and Dundee in the early 1970s, where he worked
alongside Sandy Christie. From there, he had made use of his dual citizenship and taken up a
post as consultant obstetrician/gynaecologist with the Canadian Royal Air Force in Germany.
On his return to the UK, Crichton initially applied for a Consultant position in Perth, but this
went to an obstetrician from the Lewis Hospital in Stornoway. Therefore, Crichton wisely
applied for, and was appointed to, that newly vacated post.
Although no ultrasound machines were available to him when he arrived in the Isles, Crichton's
interest in the technology was known. Almost a year later, in 1979, an under-spend in the
Western Isles Health Board's capital budget provided the opportunity for a new piece of
medical equipment to be purchased and it was decided that an ultrasound machine for the
obstetric department should be funded. The exact amount ofthis under-spend dictated the
model chosen. The 'System 85' was at the time the least expensive model available and the
Health Board simply purchased the only machine they could afford.91
In this case, therefore,
choice was circumscribed and not made on the basis of favourable comparisons with other
designs, but on purely financial criteria.
Having worked exclusively with Diasonograph-style static B-scanners up to this point, Crichton
had to learn new skills and get to know the features and idiosyncrasies of his new machine.
Initially, therefore, he proceeded with some caution and his recollections of his impressions of
the Diagnostic Sonar machine echo the sentiments expressed by those in other centres:
91 Interview with Dr Jack Crichton, 09/02/98.
167
At first that little System 85 machine, the power of that machine, as my
father would say, 'wouldn't pull the skin offa rice pudding'. It
wouldn't penetrate... you were not getting the depth that you wanted. It
didn't have the power to get down with the ultrasound and process it
properly.92
However, what is particularly interesting is the way in which Crichton attempted to
accommodate the perceived poorer quality ofhis new machine. Firstly, it significantly affected
his decisions and plans when it came to establishing a routine service. Despite the fact that
many other centres (including Perth and Dundee with which he kept in contact through his
association with Sandy Christie) were operating late first trimester scans in order to gain
accurate dates, the routine which Crichton introduced was a scan at 16 weeks gestation.93
It
would appear that the reason for delaying scanning times was directly as a result of his
assessment of his machine:
The quality of the scanners in those days...determined routine scanning.
If one tried to do scanning earlier...you could say "Oh, 1see a heart
beat" or "I see a little fetus"....But ifthe average person wanted to be
reasonably certain it was best to delay scanning until 16 weeks when the
baby was big enough and it would be easy to spot twins and where the
measurement of the baby was reasonably accurate.94
It is important to note, however, that there was a precedent for scanning at these times. Stuart
Campbell, for example, was at the time advocating routine scans at 16-18 weeks and 32 weeks -
especially if the scan was performed using a real-time machine.95
Neveriheless, Crichton would
appear to have made this decision on purely practical grounds - in other words, he altered the
clinical and social organisation of his examinations to accommodate the technical and visual
particulars of his equipment. Unlike other actors in centres such as the Queen Mother's and
Aberdeen Maternity, Crichton did not have access to any other type of equipment - he could not
92 Interview with Dr Jack Crichton, 09/02/98.
93 A second routine scan at 30 weeks was introduced a few years later (see Chapter 4).
94 Interview with Dr Jack Crichton, 09/02/98.
95 Campbell, S. & Little, D.J., (1980), 'Clinical potential of real-time ultrasound' in Bennett, M.J. & Campbell, S.,
(eds.), The basic physical principles a/real-time ultrasound scanning. pp.34-35.
168
pick and choose which scanner to use for which procedure. Instead, he was completely reliant
on the only machine he had at his disposal and had to find ways to make best use of it. Thus he
altered other aspects ofthe way in which the machine was used (in this case the times at which
scans were operated) in order to achieve better results in terms of what could be
detected/diagnosed. Indeed, he went so far as to change the time of first booking for maternity
patients from 12 weeks (which it had been previous to the introduction ofultrasound) to 16
weeks (when he conducted his first ultrasonic examination).
From this example of a change in clinical organisation and practice it can be seen that not only
was Crichton having to accommodate material/technical resistances which he perceived in his
equipment, he was also, importantly, altering his decisions to accommodate the material and
social realities ofthe Western Isles. Travel on and between islands was not quite as simple as
on the mainland. Transport between the isles was facilitated by ferry services supplied by
Caledonian McBrayne and air travel by Loganair.96
These transport links, however, were
dependant on weather and tidal conditions. The latter also affected air transport as most ofthe
small islands had no runway and planes took off and landed on the beaches. Furthermore, travel
between communities on the same island was also slow, as most roads were single track with
passing places, even on Lewis itself. Thus, by changing the date ofbooking patients to coincide
with their first scan, pregnant women would not be required to make an extra trip to the
hospital. In this way, the very organisation of obstetric services in the Lewis Hospital were
'tuned' to fit Crichton's perceptions ofthe material and technical attributes of the technology
that he used.
Nevertheless, while the reorganisation of booking times demonstrates one way that the
technical disadvantages ofthis machine were accommodated in the Western Isles, this artifact
did turn out to have at least one 'advantage' over its competitors which was to be of
considerable significance in this location - portability. Once again, however, it is evident that
96 British Airways also provided airlinks to the mainland, with regular flights from Stornoway to Glasgow and
Inverness.
169
portability emerged as a quality because of the way in which the machine was used, and
because ofthe peculiar local arrangements ofthe Isles.
As the only Consultant in obstetrics and gynaecology in the entire health board area, Crichton
also had another clinic, held once every six weeks, on the Isle of Benbecula (some 70 miles
from Stornoway) where patients from Barra, Benbecula and South Uist could be seen.97
The
reason Benbecula was chosen for these clinics was because ofthe advantageous facilities on the
island, which were provided at a large military base dating from the Second World War.
Despite the continuing backdrop of Cold War tensions, the military presence on Benbecula was
comfortably integrated with the local community. One feature ofthis was that the runway at the
base was also open to use for civilian air travel, which facilitated Crichton's trips to the island.
Furthermore, his clinic itself was held within the Medical Reception Station on the base and
here Crichton saw not only women from the local community but also the wives of military
personnel. Very soon after acquiring his ultrasound machine Crichton decided to begin taking it
with him on these monthly visits. This meant that women from the southern isles could be
offered ultrasound examinations without having to travel the considerable distance to
Stornoway. However, it also entailed the regular transportation of ultrasound equipment by
plane, which was, in itself, no small task:
I took it down with me and by the time I had the scanner and my case of
goodies and my case-notes it was quite a feat to move the stuff <l:nd it
was a fair old way.98
It should be emphasised that it would have been technically impossible to transport a static B-
scanner in this way. The concept of 'portability' did not emerge in relation to ultrasound
97 Initially this service was limited to gynaecological examinations - the six week intervals between clinics on
Benbecula were of too long a duration for any suspected obstetric anomalies. Such cases were, therefore, either
dealt with at the Hospital in Stornoway or one ofthe mainland hospitals - depending on the nature ofthe suspected
condition.
98 Interview with Dr Jack Crichton, 09/02/98
170
technology until the advent of the smaller and lighter RT units during this period. Neveliheless,
it is clear from the advertising literature ofRT ultrasound manufacturers like Diagnostic Sonar
that their definition of 'portability' differed considerably from the level of portability being
asked ofthis equipment in the Western Isles. For Diagnostic Sonar, portability simply entailed
the ability of the scanner to be moved from ward to ward on its own trolley.
Figure 3.9: Diagnostic Sonar advertisement literature c1979
(picture courtesy ofBMUS Historical Collection)
Crichton, therefore, was making use of this scmmer in a way which was unanticipated by the
designers: in the new hands of Jack Crichton the Hebridean doctor, the scanner was asked to
perform a novel role of 'flying' ultrasound machine. Thus the interpretation which Crichton
formed ofthe machine was shaped by the nature of the location within which he used it. In this
case the 'interpretative flexibility' ofthe artifact was directly affected by local contextual
factors.
Nevertheless, the translation from actor's interpretation of this artifact to actual practice was not
necessarily straightforward. Such an enhanced level of portability did not simply materialise on
171
demand, but was achieved through modification in the face of material resistance from the
equipment. For example, aside from the problems associated with the weight and bulk of the
machine, Crichton was also concerned about possible damage to the unit on these monthly
flights between the islands. In order to protect his machine, Crichton contracted the tent-making
firm of 'Blacks' to make a special padded case. However despite this, the first time the doctor
used the machine at his Benbecula clinic it stopped working after he had scanned only two
patients. As it turned out, the problem and its solution were relatively straightforward and
simple. The engineer from Diagnostic Sonar found that the vibrations of the plane had loosened
large pins in the electronic circuit boards at the back ofthe scanner and so he designed a metal
plate which was screwed over these pins to keep them in place.
It is easy to dismiss this particular instance as simply lack ofknowledge and argue that, had
Crichton been an engineer, he could have fixed his scanner in such a way as to prevent this
from occurring. However, such an argument would be both misleading and unrealistic. The
machine was being asked to perform a role for which it had not been designed and the way in
which it acted in such circumstances could not have been anticipated in advance. A
modification as simple as a panel screwed to the back was required in order that the machine be
able to perform its new role in the Western Isles, but such a modification could only be made in
response to the way in which the machine behaved in such circumstances. Thus the novel
demands placed on the scanner by Crichton provoked new responses from the machine, which
then had to be accommodated by the engineer.
Despite the emerging significance ofthe Diagnostic Sonar machine's portability, it was not
purchased specifically because ofthis - as noted earlier the over-riding reason for choosing this
particular machine was that it was the only one they could afford. Therefore, portability was an
added feature ofthe machine which the Lewis Hospital bought. It seems clear then that
Crichton's intentions (in terms of his decision to move the scanner around) were formed
through his interactions with the technology - he didn't enter into a relationship with the
technology with his intentions already formed:
172
...1didn't get the real-time scanner to go charging around the islands. I
have to be honest, it was there and I was using it and these patients had
to fly up to Stornoway to get a scan and I thought, 'Now, surely, we
could do something', so I started to take it down [to Benbecula]. I
didn't have a brilliant idea all worked out in my head beforehand, it
evolved slowly over the years as being the way to do things.99
In a sense therefore, where portability may have been insignificant for medics working in
different areas, in the Western Isles (characterised by the remoteness and geographical spread of
its population) it emerged as a pivotally important factor in the creation oftheir scanning
service. In other words, it was an aspect ofthe scanner Crichton could use, and manipulate, to
improve his service. Once again, therefore, it is only by examining the technology in use that
perceptions of its 'qualities' and 'value' can be assessed.
Indeed, the idea that portability became regarded as a central requirement of ultrasound
equipment in this region is reinforced when the details ofthe next machine purchased for the
Consultant are considered. In 1984 a new scanner was bought for the obstetric department.
What motivated both the purchase of an additional scanner, and the specific choice of model,
was Crichton's desire to extend the services provided at the peripheral clinic by offering routine
obstetric ultrasound. High on the list of desirable attributes in the new scanner, therefore, was
portability. The Consultant's experience with the Diagnostic Sonar machine in the context of
this remote location taught him to value the portability of his chosen equipment and, crucially,
led to new avenues of development in the way he organised and carried out his medical
practice.
To establish such a routine service, however, Crichton needed more than an additional machine.
As a lone consultant it was impossible to increase the frequency of the trips to the peripheral
clinic in order to scan greater numbers ofpatients on a more regular basis. Crichton had
99 ibid.
173
therefore to seek assistance. A local general practitioner (Dr Louise Hodgson), based on the
same island as the peripheral clinic, was employed by the Health Board to operate the new
screening service. 100 Although unusual, employing a GP as sonographer did have a precedent in
other remote areas of Scotland where scanners had been purchased and situated in GP-run
hospitals. 101 Furthermore, in remote areas like this it was not unusual for general practitioners
to undertake duties that would otherwise be considered within the remit of specialist medicine.
The ultrasound and associated examinations performed by the GP were relatively simple and
straightforward. She performed two routine examinations on each pregnant woman (at 16 and
32 weeks gestation) in which biparietal diameter measurements were made, fetal presentation
and placental localisation were recorded, while any gross abnormalities or multiple gestations
were looked for. Any unusual or suspect indications from either of these scans would be
brought to the attention ofthe Consultant Obstetrician and the patient referred either to the local
district general hospital, or to one ofthe larger tertiary hospitals on the mainland. The basic
nature of the scans performed was a direct consequence ofthe way the service was organised.
The GP had no on-site specialist support and was routinely scanning relatively low numbers of
women (compared to sonographers located in more densely populated areas). These factors
were thus taken into account in terms ofthe duties that she performed.
More importantly, the machine itself was chosen specifically with these issues in mind. As Dr
Hodgson recalls:
A lot of machines were coming on to the market, some aimed at
hospitals which were enormous things and some aimed at adventurous
private obstetricians which were very flashy machines that did all sorts
100 Dr Hodgson was paid on an hourly rate as a clinical assistant for her ultrasound sessions. She attended two
separate training courses in Glasgow and London, and was given additional practical training by the Consultant
Obstetrician at the local hospital. (Interview with Dr Louise Hodgson, December 1998.)
101 Scottish Home and Health Department/Scottish Health Service Planning Council, Obstetric Ultrasound in
Scotland: Report ofthe Ad Hoc Group appointed by the Specialty sub-committee for Obstetrics and Gynaecology
ofthe National Medical Consultative Committee, Edinburgh, Her Majesty's Stationary Office, 1988.
174
PAGE
MISSING
IN
ORIGINAL
in this manner. Although he experimented with this, Crichton concluded that the images
achieved in this way were inadequate for making accurate fetal measurements. Instead, at an
additional cost of around 500, an extra monitor was purchased. Thus one single scanner had
two monitors; one located in the hospital, and the other at the peripheral clinic. In this way,
only the scanner moved between the two centres and was plugged into the monitor on arrival,
thus minimising potential damage.
Figure 3.11: One of the detachable monitors used with Pie Data machine in the Western Isles.
(Photographed in Ness, Isle of Lewis by the author)
Furthermore, without the screen, the scanner could be more easily packed away and carried
from place to place in its own case. The case itself was made from hard plastic and was
supplied with the unit. However, while the protection and portability it afforded might be
176
sufficient for journeys in the boot of a doctor's car,103 previous experience with the Diagnostic
Sonar machine highlighted the need for extra precautions when it came to island-hopping
flights. Furthermore, the Consultant no longer accompanied the scanner on its trip: the machine
was taken to the airport by a member of the hospital's maintenance staff, transported in the
plane's hold, and collected by army personnel on Benbecula. The involvement of so many
untrained 'hands' and the potentially damaging dangers of regular flights in an aircraft's hold
led Crichton to have yet another case made, this time from foam-lined steel, into which the
scanner, inside its manufacturers case, could be secured.
Figure 3.12: Custom-made steel protective case, used to transport Pie Data machine
(Photographed in Castiebay, Barra by the author)
103 Scanners were, by the late 1970s, being transported in this way by obstetricians when attending sessions at
peripheral clinics (see, for example, R.P. Balfour, 'Use of a real-time ultrasound scanner in district antenatal
clinics', British Journal ofObstetrics and Gynaecology, 1978, Vol. 85, pp. 492-494). This again demonstrates that
the way in which scanners were used in clinical practice, filtered back to manufacturers and were built into the
design of new models.
177
The new screening service began on February 13th
1986.104
Once a fortnight, the scanner would
be packed up by the Obstetric Consultant and sent, unaccompanied, to the neighbouring island.
At all other times, the scanner was based in the main hospital. The following year, the
peripheral service was extended to another GP practice on the island of Barra - the most
southerly of the populated Isles - and in 1988 a further GP in Ness at the northern tip ofLewis
joined the fray. Each ofthese locations was also given separate monitors to use. A rota was
drawn up which worked on a fortnightly cycle. In the first week the scanner would be taken by
car to Ness (by a local shopkeeper who happened to work in Ness but live in Stornoway) and
returned the following afternoon. In the second week it would be flown to Castlebay in Barra
and, after being used there, would be taken by taxi to the ferry terminal at the north ofthe island
and transported to Benbecula. The following day it would be flown back to the hospital in
Stornoway. By the summer of 1988 then, the single portable Pie Data unit packed in its special
metal box was being flown, ferried and taxied between four different sites on three different
islands. Such a system was highly innovative. Its devolved nature, with obstetric scanning
being carried out in the community by local GPs, was facilitated by stretching the concept of
portability - the scanner was travelling over 250 miles every fortnight by plane, ferry and car.
Nowhere else in the UK at that time (or subsequently) had such a system evolved to overcome
the geographical and institutional barriers of a remote and scattered population such as this.
In the Western Isles, therefore, portability emerged as an important feature in ultrasound
equipment and thus as a significant advantage of linear array RT equipment over static B-
scanners. Following his experiences with the Diagnostic Sonar machine, portability became a
pre-requisite for Crichton when later purchases of ultrasound equipment were discussed. Thus,
the most important observation to be drawn from the early implementation of ultrasound in this
remote Scottish region was that the features of greatest importance in terms of the design of the
equipment emerged from actual practice - from the way in which Crichton used the machine.
104 Correspondence, 5 Feb 1986, between Dr Jack Crichton and Dr Louise Hodgson, (JC correspondence, Western
Isles Box, BMUS Historical Collection). Between the time of the machine's purchase and its use in the peripheral
clinic, the equipment was used at the Lewis Hospital.
178
The very nature of what was valued - what was sought in machine design - was the outcome of
previous experiences of ultrasound in the context ofthis particular location. Thus the way in
which the technology was used in the Western Isles altered the nature oflater practice and
helped to shape the qualities valued in later purchases. In this way, the nature of 'choice' was
neither fixed nor predictable - it was formed and altered through practice. Furthermore, the
technical deficiencies (or negative qualities) perceived in the equipment shaped the timing of
the services provided by the local consultant, which amounted to the moulding of practice to
suit the machine. In this example, therefore, both the technical and organisational dimensions of
obstetric ultrasound were mutually shaped through practice.
The problem ofdelegation: techno-social relations in the context ofmedical hierarchy
In Kirkcaldy a different quality again emerged as important when choices of equipment were
made. The town's general hospital (the Victoria) had operated an ultrasound scanning service
for both obstetrics and gynaecology since the early 1970s using an adapted Kretz A-scan
machine. lOS However, the first foray into RT scanning coincided with the transfer of obstetric
ultrasound services from the Victoria to the maternity hospital at Forth Park. This hospital
purchased a Nuclear Enterprises static scanner in 1975 which was updated by the addition of a
'spinner' RT probe in 1977. Only two years later, however, a Diagnostic Sonar linear array
scanner replaced this machine. In order to understand why particular models were chosen at
particular times, it is again necessary to consider how site-specific arrangements and
circumstances shaped consumer decisions and choices.
Opened in 1935, Forth Park Maternity Hospital was established by Kirkcaldy Town Council
and replaced the existing maternity home in Stanley Park. A large granite building set inside its
own grounds, Forth Park was gradually extended in order to facilitate the increasing scope of
maternity services and the rising number ofpatients. It was one ofthese extensions (the
105 See Chapter 2 for a discussion ofthe development of ultrasound at Kirkcaldy's Victoria Hospital.
179
building of a new hospital wing, opened in 1977) which enabled the ultrasound scanning
service to be relocated to the maternity hospital, where, initially, it became part of a newly
established radiology department within the hospital. Thus, despite the fact that the transferral
of the service placed it for the first time within the geographical realm of obstetric medicine,
the service remained under the control ofthe department of radiology. 106
It is evident that the very timing ofthis major investment had a direct affect on the choice of
ultrasound equipment. The decision to add a new wing to the hospital was taken in 1975 and,
given the nature of such capital expenditures, the cost of any new equipment to be introduced
was budgeted for and included as part ofthe overall expansion costs. More than this, however,
the new ultrasound machine was actually bought at that time - almost two years before the
opening ofthe new wing in which it was to be housed. 107 The chosen machine was a Nuclear
Enterprises compound scanner - an NE 4200 - which is unsurprising given that in 1975 that
company still had the largest share ofthe Scottish market and the new, smaller RT machines
had not yet begun to appear. As with the opening ofthe Queen Mother's Hospital in 1964, the
perceived sociotechnical requirements of obstetric ultrasound as it was practised at that time (in
terms of space and facilities) were built into the very fabric ofthe new wing. For example, a
dedicated scan room was designed which was large enough to house the machine's large
scanning frame and which had strong enough foundations to bear its weight. Furthermore, prior
experience with obstetric scanning at the Victoria hospital - particularly with regard to both the
full bladder technique and the messiness ofthe contact gels in use - led to the inclusion of
patient toilet and shower facilities close to the scan room itself.
Nevertheless, almost two years separated the formulation ofthese plans, along with the
purchase of the equipment, and the actual opening of the new wing. Given the shortage of space
106 Indeed, it is perhaps indicative ofthe widening scope of obstetric ultrasound in the 1970s that, according to Dr
Aitken, 'the x-ray department ceased to be ofany great use, as it turned out' (Interview with Dr Peter Aitken,
22/02/99)
!07 Interview with Dr Michael Hill (current Senior Obstetric Consultant at Forth Park), 15/7/96.
180
which the new wing was intended to remedy, there was no room large enough to accommodate
the equipment until the new extension was opened. Thus, the scanner was left, unused, in the
hospital's basement until the extension was completed, and women referred for scans continued
to be sent to the town's general hospital, where they would be scanned by radiological staff
using the Kretz-hybrid machine. 108
Thus the gap between the purchase ofthe NE4200 in 1975 and its introduction into practice in
1977 straddled the appearance of the new linear array RT machines and the concurrent
blossoming ofthe ultrasound equipment market. Furthermore, EMI (who had taken over
Nuclear Enterprises in October ofthe previous year) had launched their own RT probe - the
'spinner'. What was significant about this probe for the Kirkcaldy hospital was that this
transducer could be added to Nuclear Enterprises' (now EMI's) existing static compound
scanners. In other words, it was not necessary to buy a whole new machine in order to gain the
capacity to scan in real-time and display movement. Thus, although Forth Park planned for and
purchased a static scanner for their new department, by the time it was installed it was a
machine with RT capabilities. Therefore both the timing and nature ofthe building of a new
hospital wing and the creation of a new ultrasound service in Kirkcaldy, effectively shaped the
choice of RT ultrasound. Having purchased an, as yet unused, new piece of equipment - it was
more sensible and cost effective to update this machine than to replace it with a new one.
In the 'spinner' therefore, EMI were not only able to sell complete units with RT probes already
attached - they could also tap into a distinct market oftheir own by retrofitting machines which
were already in use. Furthermore, unlike the producers of linear array equipment, EMI were
able to offer their customers both the superior imaging capabilities of compound static scanning
(with the wider image view and better detail) as well as real-time imaging. For hospitals such as
FOlih Park Maternity, the attraction of this lay in the desire to have the latest, most up-to-date
equipment in their newly opened accommodation. The most recent innovation in ultrasound
108 See Chapter 2 for a more detailed account of this machine.
181
technology could be gained at a substantially smaller cost than would be required for the
purchase of a complete new unit, whilst they could also claim to possess what was regarded as
the most superior form of ultrasound in the field.
Nevertheless, while the purchase of a real-time probe may have been motivated by the desire to
keep abreast of developments in the field, a completely different 'social interest' underpinned
the choice of the next machine to be purchased. After only two years ofuse, a Diagnostic Sonar
linear array machine effectively replaced the EMI one. In order to understand the reasons for
this, it is necessary to consider how obstetric ultrasound was organised and operated in the Fife
hospital.
The transferral of obstetric ultrasound from The Victoria Hospital to Forth Park Maternity also
involved a reorganisation of operating personnel. The Chief Radiologist (Dr Peter Aitken) in
association with Forth Park's Senior Obstetric Consultant (Dr Ian Duthie) made the decision to
engage a radiographer to operate the new service. The person eventually chosen was Mrs
Eleanor Young, who had previously been engaged as a radiographer in the Victoria Hospital's
X-ray department. Mrs Young was trained to operate the technology by Dr Aitken, using the
Kretz machine at the Victoria and was also sent to the Queen Mother's to undertake the
'ultrasound in obstetrics' course. Once in-post, the radiographer was solely responsible for
scanning, calling for clinical assistance from Dr Duthie when required. In effect, therefore,
despite the fact that the only full-time operator was employed by Radiology, that the service
was under that department's jurisdiction, and that it was positioned within the maternity
hospital's new x-ray department, clinical supervision of the scanning service, nevertheless,
rested entirely with the specialty of obstetrics.
Thus the introduction ofRT scanning to Kirkcaldy coincided with an important change in
personnel - it was no longer medically trained specialists in obstetrics (Dr Duthie) and
182
radiology (Dr Aitken) who performed ultrasound examinations, but a radiographer. 109 Indeed,
this was the way in which the organisation of scanning continued in Forth Park, with yet more
radiographers being drafted in during the 1980s to deal with the increasing workload.
It is important however to avoid concluding that the downgrading of operating personnel was a
direct consequence ofthe introduction ofthe new form of imaging.110 Indeed, when the plans
for the new obstetric service were formulated, and Mrs Young appointed, real-time machines
and probes had not yet appeared. Instead, the change in personnel would appear to have been
the result of the accommodation of a number of factors. The geographical distance between the
two hospitals (and thus between the main Radiology department and its new off-shoot obstetric
service) coupled with the declining use of x-rays in obstetric cases, entailed that there were no
radiologists permanently on-site. On the other hand, while some ofthe hospital's obstetricians
(such as Dr Duthie) were keen to scan their own patients, the service needed a more permanent
operator to handle the number of cases in which a scan was felt to be useful. Thus it made more
sense to use the services of a technician, with clinical support provided by an obstetrician with
some experience ofthe technology, and who was already based in the hospital. However, in
coming to this decision it is clear that Dr Aitken felt there was a qualitative difference between
obstetric scanning and other forms of ultrasound:
I felt it was a sonographer that was all that was required because they
were getting most ofthe things they wanted. It was a different story
when you were dealing with gynaecology and abdominal scanning for
109 The wider implications ofthe increasing use oflower-grade staffto operate routine ultrasound examinations are
discussed in Chapter 4.
110 Real-time ultrasound has often been attributed by actors in the field with causing a general shift in the division
of labour around ultrasound because the equipment was much easier to use than static B-scanners. This claim is
made, for example, in a 1984 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists report on routine ultrasound
scanning, chaired by Professor Stuart Campbell, and in an outline of future training requirements for ultrasound
personnel, written by Professor Charles Whitfield (RCOG, (1984), 'Report ofthe RCOG working party on routine
ultrasound examination in pregnancy' The Chameleon Press Ltd., London, pp. 2-3; Whitfield, C.R., (1992),
'Training in ultrasound in obstetrics and gynaecology' in Chervanek, F., Isaacson, G. & Campbell, S., (eds.),
Ultrasound in obstetrics and gynaecology, Little, Brown and Co., Boston, Mass.). While the design ofthe
technology did undoubtedly contribute to this a number of other factors, such as the introduction of ultrasound
screening, also played a role. This is discussed in Chapter 4.
183
surgery and medicine and things like that. As far as the obstetrics were
concerned I felt that the obstetrician and a sonographer were capable of
doing all the scanning and it was a big part ofthe workload.III
Therefore, at least in part, the staffing decisions which were made for the new scanning service
were the outcome ofthe actual practice ofultrasound in this particular area of medicine. The
Consultant Radiologist's perception ofthe relative ease of acquiring such things as fetal
measurements and assessments ofthe pregnancy's on-going status (gained through his own
experience with the technology), informed his plans regarding the organisation of the service.
Furthermore, this view or perception of obstetric scanning was itselfthe outcome of local
circumstances and arrangements. The fact that the Radiology Department operated all forms of
ultrasound imaging; that obstetric scanning was located on a separate site from the main
department; that ofthe high number of scans performed in obstetrics, the majority would be
'normal'; that resources were finite; and that obstetric scanning was 'a big part ofthe workload'
all informed the Consultant Radiologist's view that this form of imaging could be delegated to
other staff. In other words, while there is nothing essentially easier or more straightforward
about the technology's use in obstetrics in comparison to other medical fields, in this particular
context it was more straightforward in practice.
Nevertheless, while the appointment oflower-grade staff was the result of a variety of site-
specific circumstances, it had a significant effect on the way ultrasound was perceived, and on
the qualities valued in machine design. The division of labour implemented in Kirkcaldy was
similar to that employed with x-ray technology where radiographers performed the role of
image constructers whilst clinically trained radiologists are responsible for interpreting the
images to form diagnostic opinions.112 Thus, effectively, Aitken was transferring the
organisation of one technology to another. There were, however, key differences between the
111 Interview with Dr Peter Aitken, 22/02/99.
112 This hierarchy was, of course, itself the outcome ofthe development of x-ray technology over time. See
Pasveer, B., (1992), Shadows ofknowledge, making a representing practice in medicine: x-ray pictures and
pulmonGl)' tuberculosis, 1895-1930, CIP-Gegevens Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Den Haag.
184
two forms of imaging. In particular, the standard views created during x-ray imaging were very
different from the multiple sections that could be imaged using ultrasound. l13
When viewing a
still ultrasound image created by another actor, a clinician would need to know where exactly
the probe had been placed to produce the picture, entailing that, without actually watching the
scan being performed, it was more difficult to translate and make sense ofthe resultant image.
Moreover, the introduction ofRT imaging compounded this mismatch between the technology
and such a division of labour as diagnoses would not always be necessarily apparent from a still
snapshot picture. The beating ofthe fetal heart, for example, could not be observed on a frozen
image from an RT scan. Thus with RT the locus ofdiagnosis had become even more intimately
centred on the interactive scanning process itself at the time in which it was performed. That is
to say, unlike in radiology, the creation and interpretation of images with RT were becoming
increasingly interrelated in space and time in that the person who was performing the scan was
simultaneously interpreting the images and drawing diagnostic conclusions. Thus, the technique
of real-time imaging created a much more interactive relationship between the skills of image
construction and interpretation - locating the latter more directly at the point of practice. This
was problematic for the traditional social organisation ofradiology - where practice had been
moulded by the very different technology of x-rays, and had been divided in a hierarchical
manner between radiographers (image creators) and radiologist (image interpreters). In
Kirkcaldy, Aitken's accommodation ofthis problem was to cede some degree of authority in
image interpretation to the radiographer. In essence, Mrs Young was authorised to diagnose
'normality', and to carry out basic measurements and assessments, but any suspected anomaly
displayed in the image had to be verified in a scan performed by one of the hospital's
ultrasound-experienced obstetricians.
This division of labour had a direct impact on the way in which ultrasound equipment was
assessed and the design attributes that appealed to those responsible for the choice of new
113 See Chapter 2, where the differences between ultrasound and x-rays in terms ofthe way images are presented is
explored in relation to the involvement of radiological staff with ultrasound at Aberdeen Maternity Hospital.
185
machines. As Chief Radiologist for all ofFife's hospital services, Dr Aitken occupied a
powerful position within Fife Regional Hospital Board. Not only was he in a favourable
position to lobby the Board for finance, he was also largely responsible for the choice of new
equipment. In 1979, he persuaded the Board to buy a Diagnostic Sonar 'System 185' for Forth
Park's obstetric ultrasound service. This machine was the second model produced by Diagnostic
Sonar - which went onto the market in around 1979 - and was essentially a redesigned version
of the 'System 85' with a few added features. 114
Aitken first noticed this machine during a
demonstration at Perth Royal Infirmary. Sandy Christie, who provided this demonstration, had
developed a good working relationship with the two directors of Diagnostic Sonar when they
worked for Nuclear Enterprises. Demonstrations such as this were beneficial for both parties -
providing a direct marketing opportunity for the manufacturers and enabling Christie to extend
his growing reputation in the field as a significant actor at the 'cutting edge' of developments in
the technology.
The Kirkcaldy Radiologist recalls this particular Diagnostic Sonar machine as the 'nicest linear
array' which had 'the nicest picture and most easy to use unit' .115 Given the division of labour
at FOlth Park, ease of use had become an important consideration and ofthe linear arrays he had
seen, this particular model was viewed as the best for facilitating this without sacrificing the
clarity of the image. There were, however, other aspects to this machine which were also
considered to be valuable:
I had also been interested in the recording side of this - writing up the
records and so on - for the obstetric cases in particular. [Diagnostic
Sonar] developed this little device that had, instead oflooking up the
tables and deciding what it was, it did it quickly - just like that. You put
114 Details of the extra features added to the 'System 185' can be found in Diagnostic Sonar's advertising literature
and Health Equipment Information, (1979), 'Evaluation of real-time ultrasonic scanners - first report', August issue,
No. 81, p32. (BMUS Historical Collection, Ultrasonic Equipment Index, Folder AAAAA).
115 Interview with Dr Peter Aitken, 22/02/99.
186
your probes on, it read out the BPD and it gave the other things right
away.1
16
What Aitken is referring to here is the electronic box designed by Diagnostic Sonar and added
to the 'System 185'. Using the equipment's on-screen callipers (what Aitken refers to above as
the 'probes') the operator could indicate the points at which she wanted to take measurements
ot~ for example, bi-parietal diameter or crown-rump length. The electronic unit would then not
only calculate and display those measurements, but would also use them to work out the
gestational age ofthe fetus and its expected delivery date (using the date ofthe scan). All ofthis
information was then displayed on-screen - along with the image itself. Furthermore, the
'System 185' could also be purchased with a photographic unit which could print out the
display - creating a hard copy of both scan image and measurements, etc. which could be placed
in the patient's record.
Once again, Aitken's perceptions of the greatest benefit (or value) ofthis system related directly
to the way in which scanning was organised in the Fife maternity hospital. Before this machine
was put into practice, Mrs Young, working largely independently, had to relate the
measurements she took from the scan images to the charts produced by Stuart Campbell and his
colleagues. ll7
She then had to write the estimated dates and gestational age into the patient's
record by hand. This new machine, however, would do most of this work for her - lessening the
time taken up on such tasks. In addition, it could be argued that the machine's ability to print
out both the image and the data which could then be kept as a record, could be used as a
technical accommodation of Forth Park's medical supervision 'problem'. The clinicians
(radiologist or obstetrician) could oversee her scanning to some degree by examining the
printout showing where the callipers had been placed and what measurements had been taken.
116 ibid.
117 Charts (or 'normograms') of normal fetal growth expressed as biparietal diamter were produced by Campbell
and Newman in 1971. See Campbell, S. & Newman, G.B., (1971), 'Growth offetal biparietal diameter during
normal pregnancy' Journal ofobstetrics and gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth, Vol. 78, No.6, pp. 513-9.
187
While the problems associated with not actually observing the scan being performed remained,
these features of the Diagnostic Sonar machine nevertheless provided additional ways to
communicate information about each scan within the hierarchical division of labour that had
been established. In other words, the technical features of this equipment were perceived as one
means whereby the organisation of obstetric scanning at Forth Park could be made to resemble
x-radiography more closely.
Here again, therefore, two important points can be made. Firstly, from a practical, clinical
perspective it can be seen that it was not necessarily the revolutionary moving images which
attracted potential buyers of real-time equipment - but various other features, which were
important to different degrees in different locations. Furthermore, it can be clearly seen that
both Aitken's choice of machine and his assessment of its 'qualities' were the outcome or result
of the actual practice of scanning in Forth Park. That is to say, his decisions were shaped by the
way in which scanning was organised and operated in the maternity hospital: his decisions were
the emergent outcome of his interactions with the technology.
To conclude this section, it can be seen that the choice and use ofreal-time scanning in
Kirkcaldy was determined by both social and technical factors. The NE4200, which had cost
around 20 000 to buy in 1975 shaped the choice oftheir first RT imaging modality - being
updated in 1977 with a real-time 'spinner' device. The reason for this lay with the fact that the
purchase of the Nuclear Enterprises machine was integrally tied to the development of the new
hospital wing, and the way in which such purchases were organised meant that the machine was
acquired before it was able to be used. However, between the time of its purchase and
installation, the nature of ultrasound had began to change and real-time scanners were
beginning to appear and so, the easiest and cheapest way for Kirkcaldy to make use of the new
form of scanning was by updating their existing machine with an RT probe. Nevertheless, it
was put into use for only a couple of years before being replaced by a much less costly machine.
188
Furthermore, an examination ofthe way in which RT was used in Kirkcaldy highlights two
important points. Firstly, a number of contingent factors which were grounded both historically
and locationally (such as the geographical separation ofthe two hospitals, the division between
gynaecology and obstetrics, and the timing of the building programme at the maternity hospital)
were tied to, and helped to shape, both the choice of equipment and its practical use. For
example, the choice between the 'spinner' and the linear array did not centre completely on the
'quality' ofthe resultant images. Instead other technical features (such as the 'spinner's ability
to be fitted to the compound scanner or the linear array's electronic measurement system)
emerged as important points of difference, and these decisions were, in turn, informed by a
number of site-specific factors.
There are clear similarities between the introduction ofRT in Kirkcaldy and in the Western
Isles. Both Aitken at Forth Park Maternity and Crichton at the Lewis Hospital chose their
machines for pragmatic and practical reasons. At the Lewis, a linear array unit was picked
because of its cost effectiveness, while at Forth Park, the ability ofthe 'spinner' to be installed
on an already purchased machine motivated consumer choice. In both centres, however, other
attributes and qualities emerged as a consequence ofthe technology's use in each location,
which then influenced later interpretations of design. Furthermore, although both forms of RT
may well have produced inferior images compared to static B-scan machines, they were
nevertheless regarded as adequate. These hospitals were not specialist tertiary centres
conducting intricate and detailed diagnoses and thus the role which ultrasound was asked to
perform centred on basic measurements and checks into the on-going status of pregnancies
scanned. Thus, in light ofthe technological options on offer at this time, choices were made on
the basis of practical, routine expectations and requirements. Nevertheless, as both examples
highlight, once specific machines had been chosen and introduced into practice, they
themselves helped to mould and shape the contours ofthe technology's development in each
location.
189
Conclusions
The arrival of real-time ultrasound in the late 1970s heralded a new era in both the market for,
and practice of, obstetric ultrasound. Nuclear Enterprises, whose static B-scan machines had
dominated as the principal form ofthe technology adopted in Scottish hospitals from the mid
1960s, came under threat from a whole host of companies entering the market. Whilst some of
these were large enterprises which had found success in other countries or sectors ofthe
medical imaging market, others were smaller enterprises such as Diagnostic Sonar who
emerged specifically from within the context ofthis flourishing new market. What made the
diagnostic ultrasound market attractive at this time was the advent of new modalities of
imaging. Linear-array real-time machines were cheaper to produce - they required neither the
large gantry nor the complicated electronic systems demanded by the static B-scan design. This,
in conjunction with their smaller size entailed that, potentially, they could be sold in greater
numbers - both to hospitals and clinics that had not previously been able to secure the funds for
the more costly B-scanners, and as additional machines to those who already used the
technology. For example, some hospitals located RT machines in labour wards, where fetal
presentation could be checked when pregnant women were admitted. Thus, the commercial
success of the new designs (and the companies which produced them) was founded on both the
displacement of static scanning in hospitals which already had ultrasound and on the expansion
of sales in the 'virgin territory' ofthose hospitals who were not already ultrasound-equipped.
The new RT manufacturers employed a variety of marketing strategies in their attempts to
achieve these objectives, from mail drops of advertising literature and demonstrations of
equipment, to forming close working relationships with their potential customers through sales
teams, loans of equipment on 'trial basis' and technical support. The British Medical
Ultrasound Group (BMUG) in particular emerged as an important conduit for such marketing.
The Group's annual conference presented opportunities to sponsor wine receptions, but also
(and more importantly) to demonstrate equipment. The first such manufacturers' exhibition
190
occurred when the conference was held in Leeds in 1974,118 but the scale ofthis exhibition
increased in the late 1970s and, from then, became a regular feature ofthe re-named British
Medical Ultrasound Society's annual conferences. One particularly popular strategy employed
on these occasions was the 'live' demonstration during which young, mainly female, models
were scanned, either by sales representatives themselves or by medical personnel with whom
they were associated, using the latest equipment on offer by the company. This practice
(particularly when pregnant women were involved) came under heavy criticism in the early
1980s when concern over safety became a significant issue, although it has since re-
appeared. 119 Not only did such demonstrations provide direct marketing opportunities, but they
also enabled sales representatives to meet potential new clients, form new contacts and discuss
new developments. 120 Furthermore, the society's journal (Bulletin ofthe BMUS), published
three times per year, also provided advertising opportunities. From 1983 onwards, the Bulletin
was redesigned into a glossy and more lengthy publication and for the first time manufacturers
could buy advertising space. A new era of mass marketing and commercialism had thus arrived.
This heightened commercialism gave those seeking to purchase ultrasound machines their first
taste of 'consumer choice' from the various imaging modalities and machine designs on offer.
However, it is apparent from the above discussion ofthe introduction and use ofRT ultrasound
equipment that a wide variety of factors influenced the choices made between different models
and designs. At the Queen Mother's, for example, RT was initially adopted in the context of
research - with machines being assessed for their efficacy and utility in obstetric practice. In the
smaller institutions in Kirkcaldy and Stornoway, on the other hand, the relative financial costs
associated with different models played a significant role in influencing choice: a mechanical
118 BMUG, (1974), Bulletin a/the BMUG, No. 12, November.
119 The 1980s safety debate is examined in Chapter 4.
120 Walking around one such exhibition with John Fleming in Glasgow, it was apparent how fruitful such
manufacturers' displays were for the companies involved. On the one hand, it was evident that close inter-personal
relationships had been built up between sales staff and ultrasound workers. Furthermore, in addition to the
ubiquitous conference packs, advertising literature was also distributed in the form of posters, mugs, pens, and
even umbrellas with company logos. The costs associated with such forms of marketing were clearly considered
justifiable by the manufacturers.
191
spinning probe was chosen in Kirkcaldy because it could be fitted to existing equipment, while
the Western Isles Health Board chose the cheapest model they could obtain - a linear array
from Diagnostic Sonar.
Nevertheless, the most profound technical difference between real-time machines and static B-
mode scanners was the ability ofthe former to display motion in an instantaneous rapidly
renewing image. It would thus be tempting to suggest that this more than any other aspect of the
new forms ofthe technology secured its adoption. However, the above discussion highlights
that while this was undoubtedly regarded as an advantageous feature, it was by no means the
most significant factor in accounting for the successful diffusion of these machines. Indeed,
actors from all hospitals in this study recall the deficiencies perceived in the new imaging
modalities in comparison to static B-scan equipment - particularly the poorer image quality and
smaller scan view. Thus in order to explain why particular actors chose particular models, a
number of features including portability, ease-of-use and probe design must be examined in
terms of how they were valued in different locations.
Furthermore, the features most valued in each centre were not necessarily anticipated at the
outset. In the Western Isles, for example, the portability ofthe smaller linear array machines
emerged as a highly important aspect ofthis technology and one which helped to shape future
ultrasound provision in the area. The initial Diagnostic Sonar machine was not, however,
chosen because of its portability. In the Queen Mother's, any questions regarding the role ofRT
in a large specialist centre were answered through its use to visualise invasive procedures such
as amniocenteses. Thus, the qualities valued in each technological design when it was first
purchased, were not necessarily those which emerged as most significant when it was placed
into practice. That is to say, the reasons underlying why a particular machine is introduced do
not always correlate with why it is valued in practice.
This observation has two important consequences for the manner in which technological
development is theorised. Firstly, consumers of technology need to be viewed as interested
192
actors whose activities in practice shape their perceptions of artifact design. What they do with
the technologies they use is as significant as why they purchase them. In other words, in terms
of the SCOT approach, actors' interpretations of artifacts are formed through practice - how a
technology is perceived can change as it is put into use. 121
Secondly, while the concept of
'relevant social groups' 122 influencing technological change through their shared interpretations
of artifacts is attractive, it perhaps conceals more than it enlightens. If experience is accepted as
a factor which influences machine choice and interpretation, then the very heterogeneity ofthat
experience will lead to differences in actors' perceptions. In the Western Isles, Jack Crichton
valued the portability of the linear array design; in the Queen Mother's its ease of handling
during invasive tests became its most significant attribute; while in Kirkcaldy its ease of use
and on screen measurements were important. Thus while actors in these locations shared a
similar preference for a particular design it was for very different reasons, and these reasons
themselves emerged from practice. Thus the idea of 'relevant social groups' with a shared,
homogenous view of technology is not applicable in this case.
Furthermore, the development ofRT scanning in each location was shaped by the interplay of
an array of particular and site-specific factors. What was valued in the Western Isles,
characterised by its distinctive social geography and local arrangements, was not necessarily
important in a large, urban, specialist centre like the Queen Mother's or Aberdeen Maternity
Hospital. It is thus clear that to understand the process of diffusion of technologies such as RT
ultrasound, the actions performed by consumers and users - be they institutions or individuals -
need to be analysed within their specific historical and spatial contexts. In a manner similar to
the development ofthe mountain bike as highlighted by Paul Rosen, \23 a variety of site-specific
events, circumstances and developments influenced the way in which ultrasound machines
were used.
121 Pinch, T.J. & Bijker, W.E., (1987), 'The social construction of facts and artifacts'.
122 ibid.
123 Rosen, P., (1993), 'The social construction of mountain bikes'.
193
In summary, therefore, the process oftechnological change in obstetric ultrasound was
complex, messy and multi-causal. What motivated actors to choose specific designs cannot be
explained exclusively by either general, shared social intentions, nor by common interpretations
of technical superiority. Furthermore, the actors who purchased and used ultrasound machines
were neither 'consumer dopes' nor 'cultural heroes'. In their choice of equipment they made
rational decisions which were not simply based on an abstract assessment ofthe choices
available, but which were instead formed through their knowledge of local site-specific
circumstances and arrangements. In this way a variety of economic, organisational and material
factors peculiar to each location influenced the decision-making process. Moreover, once
placed into practice, these same local conditions shaped the way in which the machines were
used. Artifacts could be directly manipulated in order to perform in hitherto unpredicted ways,
while the technical qualities and capabilities of a machines could be accommodated by
manipulating its social organisation. For this reason, the diversity that is apparent in the way
identical artifacts were employed and used by actors in different Scottish hospitals provides
further evidence to show that 'diffusion' and 'innovation' are not mutually exclusive terms. The
practices associated with such equipment emerged in very distinctive and innovative ways in
each centre. Thus the spread ofthis technology to new centres interacted with a variety of other
forms of organisation and practice specific to each location. These interactions, in turn,
produced new practical, cognitive and organisational developments, as an emergent outcome of
the way in which RT ultrasound was accommodated and used in each centre. A whole host of
unanticipated features interacted with one another and gave the technology its distinctive form
in each location. Thus, the spread of RT machines themselves did not represent the diffusion of
the technology - rather the spread of such equipment, when added to a multitude of other
factors specific to each site, took part in the creation of novel forms of activity and practice.
Thus innovation and diffusion need to be viewed as integrally related processes - rather than the
beginning and end of a single historical development.
194
Chapter 4
Regulating the routine? Stabilisation, standardisation and
heterogeneity in the routine use of ultrasound.
195
Introduction
By the start ofthe 1980s, the technical wars between different types of ultrasound scanner had
been effectively won by the linear array real-time (RT) machines. While mechanical sector
scanners (such as the 'spinner') continued to be used in some institutions, and while others still
made use of previously purchased static B-scan equipment, new machines were universally
chosen from amongst the various models of linear array equipment. The success ofthe linear
array design did not, however, indicate the end ofthe technical development of ultrasound
equipment. A number of changes in transducer design emerged including curvilinear arrays
(smaller probes which produced wider views into the body than the original linear arrays using
slightly different 'firing' mechanisms) and trans-vaginal probes (transducers inserted into the
vagina which used higher power output and a design akin to a hybrid between the 'spinner'
design and the curvilinear array). Colour Doppler (which could visualise the direction of fluid
motion and thus be used to assess blood flow between fetus, placenta, and mother) was also
introduced into obstetric equipment. Furthermore, developments in information technology,
keyboard design and microchips also all had a significant effect on technical design. Thus
subtle differences in design between the various models persisted. These however amounted to
design preferences and added features which did not 'compete' with the basic imaging modality
ofRT - the real-time ultrasound scanner had become the definitive form ofthe technology-
although the particular model chosen was a matter oftaste, preference and requirement. This is
neatly illustrated by one prominent actor's comments on the difference between models from
the early 1980s:
if somebody was to give you a machine for Christmas, in your stocking, if
it was free it wouldn't matter what it was. If you had a choice, you would
still make your own personal choice, but that's a subjective thing - maybe
you like the colour, maybe the buttons are in a better place, the
arrangement on the keyboard is better, the screen is bigger, whatever. You
know, if it was up to you, you'd always choose one over the other, but if
196
somebody gave you one for nothing you wouldn't care - you really
wouldn't mind.!
Thus obstetric ultrasound equipment in the 1980s could be described as a relatively stable
artifact, in terms of the basic form of imaging modality employed. The increased
competitiveness ofthe ultrasound market which emerged in the 1970s continued to ensure that
differences in design and consumer choice were endemic features ofthe supply ofequipment,
but this did not imply the kind of competing technological forms associated with the
introduction ofRT.
Furthermore, the actual practice of obstetric scanning also reached something akin to a
'standard procedure' - a routine feature of antenatal provision. Firstly, it achieved stability in
terms of its ubiquity. A survey carried out in 1977 (and reported in 1979) indicated the use of
diagnostic ultrasound (although not confined to obstetric ultrasound) in 26 Scottish hospitals,
and a total of34 machines in regular clinical use? No estimates, however, were made ofthe
number of scans performed. By 1983, however, all 27 of Scotland's Consultant obstetric units
operated an ultrasound service, while a significant number of smaller satellite clinics and
general practitioner obstetric units also operated the technology.3 This amounted to 96
ultrasound scanners used for obstetric diagnoses, only 19 of which were static B-scan machines
still in use, with a further seven B-scan machines with the 'spinner' RT probe.4
The 27
Consultant obstetric units administered obstetric care to around 94% ofthe pregnant women in
Scotland (the vast majority ofthe remaining six percent being managed by Scotland's 48
General Practitioner (GP) obstetric units. With a total of 124,604 scans being performed in
1983, the National Medical Consultative Committee (NMCC) report of 1986 estimated that
87% of all pregnancies in Scotland were examined ultrasonically.
I Interview with Dr Sandy Christie, 10112/97
2 Scottish Home and Health Department, (1979), 'Report on the future development of ultrasound in Scotland'
(unpublished paper), p.l & Tables 1&2.
J Scottish Home and Health Department/Scottish Health Service Planning Council, (1986), 'Obstetric ultrasound in
Scotland: report ofthe ad hoc group appointed by the specialty sub-committee for obstetrics and gynaecology of
the National Medical Consultative Committee' Her Majesty's Stationary Office, Edinburgh, p16.
4 ibid., p. 25, table 4.
197
Furthermore, a certain degree of 'stabilisation' can also be detected in the actual practice of
obstetric scanning. That is to say, the way in which images were created - the activities required
to produce images - and the kinds of information sought, had begun to coalesce around a
number of standard practices such as measurements of bi-parietal diameter (BPD) and crown-
rump length (eRL), placentallocaiisation and examination ofthe fetal spinal structure. That is
not, of course, to argue that heterogeneity disappeared - key differences in the way scans were
conducted by actors working in different centres remained. At the local level, however, the
subtle design differences between the various models were not associated with any major
reorientation in the skilled practice of ultrasound scanning.
Obstetric ultrasound had thus, by the beginnings of the 1980s, become an established part ofthe
routine of antenatal care used on a regular basis for the diagnosis of a variety of conditions and
pathologies in pregnancy. At this point therefore, the career of obstetric ultrasound appears to
bear all the hallmarks ofthe 'standard procedure' described in John B McKinlay's 'Seven
stages in the career of a medical innovation':
There follows a period during which the innovation [...Jachieves the
privileged status ofa 'standard procedure'. For a period oftime it becomes
generally accepted by interested parties as the most appropriate way of
proceeding with a particular problem or situation.s
The increased number of patients being offered ultrasound examinations; of obstetricians who
supported and advocated the use ofthe technology; oflocations providing the service; of
personnel employed; and of clinical conditions which could be detected, all testify to
ultrasound's position as a standard practice within obstetrics.
There are, however, problems in using the term 'standard procedure' to describe ultrasound
practices in Scotland. The term can be used to imply uniformity of practice, conformity to a
5 McKinlay, J.B., (1981), 'From "promising report" to "standard procedure": seven stages in the career of a
medical innovation' Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly/Health and Society, Vol. 59, No.3, p. 387.
198
particular universal standard. This chapter will argue that such uniformity did not exist, despite
a series of attempts throughout the 1980s to impose this. Although obstetric ultrasound became
a regular feature ofthe antenatal care of pregnant women across Scotland the way in which it
was used, and by whom, was never truly 'standard'. Key differences can be observed in the
technology's 'career' from location to location and thus heterogeneity of practice persisted
throughout the 1980s. Thus ultrasound may well have become 'generally accepted by interested
parties as the most appropriate way of proceeding' but the manner in which it was employed in
the various locations differed substantially. The ubiquity and regular use of obstetric ultrasound
did not, therefore, equate to a standardised form of practice. Thus the term 'standard practice'
in this context can only be applied on a site specific basis - a standard routine was established in
each centre to fit local circumstances, but this was not translated into a universal form of
practice shared by all. In the end, therefore, the appropriateness ofthe very term is questionable
as it may give the impression of a uniformity that is non-existent.
It is also tempting to interpret both the Ubiquity ofthe linear array design and its relatively
widespread, routine and standard usage within obstetric practice as the 'stabilisation' of
obstetric ultrasound in the social construction of technology (SCOT) sense of the term.6
It could
be suggested, for example, that controversy over machine design had become 'closed' through
demonstration of its utility in practice or that opponents ofthe use of ultrasound in obstetrics
had been silenced through social persuasion ofthe technology's efficacy and that all interested
parties (relevant social groups) had come to share the same interpretation ofthe technology.
This type of 'stabilisation' would, from a SCOT perspective, indicate the final stage of
development.
This, however, presents certain problems in analysing the further developments that occurred in
obstetric ultrasound during the 1980s. Firstly, while the technology persisted as a regular
feature of obstetric medicine, it was (as noted above) never completely stabilised in terms of
design. Thus the concept of an artifact's 'stabilisation' can only be accepted if it is considered
6 Pinch, T. & Bijker, W., (1984), 'The social construction offacts and artifacts; or how the sociology of science
and the sociology oftechnology might benefit each other,' Social studies a/science, Vol. 14, pp. 399-441.
199
in relative terms. Although the technical developments that occurred at this time did not
represent a challenge to the underlying design principles ofRT, they do nevertheless
demonstrate that technical innovation is an on-going process. Indeed, the present debate over
the potential uses of three-dimensional ultrasound provides further evidence that this
technology is far from being technically 'stable'. However, the 1980s did mark a period of
'relative' stability in comparison with the development ofRT ultrasound in the 1970s in that
the changes in technical design which occurred were more subtle in nature.
Moreover, this chapter will problematise another aspect of the SCOT perspective. Obstetric
ultrasound underwent a period of major transformation during the 1980s, during the time in
which this relative stability occurred. In essence, this period saw ultrasound reconceptualised as
a screening technology - i.e. one which was used on a universal basis to scan women whose
pregnancies were otherwise considered 'normal' (i.e. non-pathological). This translation of
ultrasound from a selective diagnostic tool to a universal screening device represented a
significant reconceptualisation ofthe technology in terms of its purpose, role and social
organisation. Importantly, however, this was neither caused by, nor resulted in, any significant
reconfiguration of ultrasound as an 'artifact'. Instead, it was the social organisation of the
technology that was reconfigured. That is not to say that the social relations of ultrasound
technology did not interact with technical changes in the equipment, but they were neither a
direct product of, nor did they directly shape, the latter. Instead, as will be argued in this
chapter, the transformation of obstetric ultrasound in the 1980s represents an instance of
technological change without major technical change, and thus even the relative stabilisation of
a technological artifact cannot be presumed to represent the stabilisation of a technology. In
other words the lid of the 'black box' can never fully be described as closed, even if the artifact
itself appears relatively stable.
This chapter will make two inter-related points. Firstly, it will be argued that the concept of a
universal, standardised and routinely applied ultrasound screening service was never fully
achieved, despite a number of attempts to do so. A number of factors including the
technology'S site-specific organisation and the nature ofthe practice itself militated against this.
200
For this reason, routine ultrasound screening in pregnancy remained a heterogeneous form of
practice. Secondly, stabilisation as it is currently applied in sociological theories oftechnology
will be problematised. On the one hand, the relative stability of a technological artifact (in
terms of its acceptance and adoption into practice) is insufficient grounds on which to make any
claims in relation to the stabilisation of the technology as practised. Major transformations and
developments in the way a technology is used and for what purpose can occur without
necessarily heralding changes in technical composition. In addition, stabilisation in the practice
of obstetric ultrasound can only be observed at the local level. For this reason, the concept is
only useful in technology studies when it is used to express stability of local arrangements and
practices. Even then, it cannot be assumed to be the end of a technical change, but merely a
relative hiatus in an on-going developmental process.
In the following pages, the development and significance of universal screening strategies in
each case study centre will be compared. As will be demonstrated below, the nature of 'routine'
ultrasound differed from location to location in terms of delivery, staffing, training, as well as
the intentions and ideologies that underpinned their development.
Furthermore, the appropriateness of using the technology for screening; as well as the attendant
problems associated with the larger volume ofwork and the increasing use of lower grade staff
to undeliake this more repetitive form of practice, became issues of concern and debate
amongst representatives of the various professional and government bodies. This debate was
given added impetus in 1984, when the issue ofthe safety of diagnostic ultrasound became a
matter of considerable public concern. In what follows, these debates will be outlined, and
assessed in terms of what impact, if any, they had on the development of routine scanning in
Scotland.
It will be argued that the policy recommendations made during this period took the form they
did as a direct result of the heterogeneous nature of the diffusion and development of obstetric
ultrasound. That is to say, the diverse circumstances which had both shaped, and themselves
been moulded by, the diffusion ofthis technology had to be accommodated in any attempts to
201
standardise the technology's provision. The wider Scottish and UK policies that emerged
accommodated this diversity by allowing considerable scope for differences in practice. Thus
'standard practice', 'routine screening' and 'stabilisation' can only be used as terms to describe
site-specific occurrences, rather than to signify any generalised, universal form of practice.
Universal screening with ultrasound in Scotland: some key characteristics
Although the number of cases examined using ultrasound gradually expanded throughout its
history, as the number of conditions it could be used to help diagnose increased, it was largely
perceived as a diagnostic tool for 'selective' cases in most hospitals until the 1980s. It was, in
other words, offered only to women who presented with certain clinical indications - either
resulting from clinical examination or history. Bleeding in early pregnancy, suspected multiple
pregnancy or large- or small-for-dates fetus, history of recurrent miscarriage or fetal
malformation, etc. are all examples ofthe kinds of cases which would be offered ultrasound
examination. Many ofthese clinical indications were relatively common, such as bleeding in
early pregnancy, and thus a high proportion of women would be scanned. Ultrasound therefore
became a regular feature of obstetric medicine offered to an ever-growing number of women.
However, as confidence in the technology'S capabilities grew, a number of centres began to
develop policies in which all pregnant women (regardless of 'clinical risk') would be offered an
obstetric ultrasound scan as a matter of routine. A number of motivations can be suggested for
the expansion ofthe technology'S use in this manner. There can be, for example, powerful
economic incentives to increase the capacity utilisation of expensive pieces of medical
equipment. While ultrasound machines were costly to purchase, they were relatively
inexpensive to run in comparison with other imaging technologies such as x-rays, computed
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Increased use, therefore, represented
the medical equivalent of 'economy of scale' - overall costs per examination were lower as the
initial capital expenditure was spread over greater numbers of scans. In this way, ultrasound
could appear less expensive (on paper, at least). Another way of conceptualising this is the 'if
202
it's there - use it' mentality, neatly noted by Sally Inch? Furthermore, it is possible to suggest
that modern medicine draws much of its authority from specialist technology and that the desire
to display technological sophistication provides a powerful incentive for increasing the use, and
consequently the visibility, of its technologies.
8
A hospital which comfortably and routinely
makes use oftechnologies such as ultrasound clearly displays its familiarity with modern
developments in medicine. A final motivation, which was perhaps particularly prevalent from
the 1980s onwards, was the danger of litigation. A number of medical malpractice suits made it
evident that the non-use of an available technology could present legal dangers almost as much
as its misuse.9
The extent to which any or all of these social and economic factors influenced
the development of universal screening policies is impossible to gauge. However, the clinical
rationale that underpinned them is more accessible. In particular, the advantages of accurate
dating via ultrasonic measurements ofthe fetus (in terms of the later diagnosis of a number of
conditions as well as the management of late pregnancy and the induction of labour) and the
identification of multiple gestations (which substantially increased the risk of both maternal and
fetal mortality) were considered significant enough to justify such policies. \0 Overall, therefore,
and in addition to its function as a diagnostic tool for a number of clinical conditions, obstetric
ultrasound was re-conceptualised as a screening technology - to be applied universally to all
pregnant women. This was often referred to as 'routine ultrasound'.
The development of ultrasound into a screening technology was not a unique occurrence.
Throughout the twentieth century, screening technologies within medicine have become
increasingly prevalent and many forms of antenatal monitoring have developed along these
7 Inch, S., (1982), Birthrights: a parent's guide to modern childbirth, Hutchison & Co., London.
8 Banta, H.D., (1984), 'Embracing or rejecting innovations: clinical diffusion of health care technology' in Reiser,
SJ. & Anbar, M., (eds.), The machine at the bedside: strategies/or using technology in patient care, Cambridge
UP, Cambridge, pp. 65-92; Reiser, SJ., (1978), Medicine and the reign 0/technology, Cambridge UP, Cambridge,
chapter 8.
9 Many ofthose interviewed who operated obstetric ultrasound in the 1980s mentioned their beliefthat the fear of
possible litigation had increased the routine use ofthe technology. See also Curran, WJ., (1984), 'The unwanted
suitor: law and the use of health care technology' in Reiser, SJ. & Anbar, M., (eds.), The machine at the bedside,
pp. 119-134; Reiser, SJ., (1978), Medicine and the reign o/technology, chapter 8
10 Scottish Home and Health Department/Scottish Health Service Planning Council, (1986), 'Obstetric ultrasound
in Scotland'; Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG), (1984), 'Report of the RCOG working
party on routine ultrasound examination in pregnancy' The Chameleon Press Ltd, London.
203
lines. Indeed, the very concept of antenatal 'monitoring' - i.e. the surveillance of an outwardly
natural physiological state in the attempt to detect hidden pathology - is by definition a method
of screening. II However, the increasing centralisation of maternity services in the twentieth
century (which was accelerated by - although not directly the product of - the formation ofthe
National Health Service in 1948) helped to enshrine screening practices at the centre ofthe
medical management ofpregnancy. 12
Nevertheless, there is nothing inevitable about the translation of a diagnostic device into a
screening technology. For example, the nature ofthe technology itself is crucial in determining
whether it is practical to employ it as a screening device. Obstetric ultrasound was non-
invasive, relatively inexpensive to run (although costly to purchase), results could be obtained
immediately, routine scans could be delegated to lower grade staff, and examinations
performed relatively quickly. Of course, many ofthese 'advantages' were historically specific
and had emerged from the development ofthe technology over time but, nevertheless, key
aspects of obstetric ultrasound made it well suited to performing a screening role.
Furthermore, the translation from diagnostic tool to screening device requires organisation,
planning and resources. It is not, therefore, something which simply appears overnight but
instead is carefully planned and, once implemented, gradually shaped to accommodate the
realities of such a policy in practice. In this manner, ultrasound screening policies in Scottish
hospitals can be observed to change over time and, more significantly, to reflect the site-
II There is a vast literature (mainly in the Fouculdian tradition) which examines screening technologies in medicine
in terms of control over, and surveillance of, otherwise normal populations. See, for example, Armstrong, D.,
(1983), Political anatomy ofthe body: medical knowledge in Britain in the 20''' centlllY, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge; idem, (1993), 'Public health spaces and the fabrication of identity' Sociology, Vol. 27, No.3,
pp. 393-410; Inch S (1989) Birthrights: a parent's guide to modern childbirth(second edition),The Merlin Press
Ltd, London; Nettleton, (1992), Powel~ pain and dentistlY, Open University Press, Buckingham, Philidelphia;
Nettleton, S. & Bunten, R., (I995), The sociology ofhealth promotion: critical analyses ofconsumption, lifestyle
and risk, Routledge, London; Oakley, A., (1984), The captured womb: a histo/y ofthe medical care ofpregnant
women, Basil Blackwell, Oxford. See also Jewson, N., (1976), 'The disappearance of the sick man from medical
cosmology, 1770-1870' Sociology, Vol. 10, pp. 225-244. Although obstetric ultrasound has been used to explore
these issues, a full engagement with this type of theoretical discourse lies beyond the scope ofthis chapter.
12 Oakley, A., (1984), The captured womb.
204
specific characteristics within which they operate.
Although it is a phenomenon most associated with the 1980s, it is significant that a number of
centres began to adopt obstetric ultrasound screening policies from the mid 1970s. In 1975,
Perth Royal Infirmary (PRI) was the first Scottish centre to introduce a screening policy for all
pregnant women, regardless of whether they were categorised as 'high' or 'low' risk by clinical
examination or obstetric history. Ninewells Hospital in Dundee, which shared the same
obstetric ultrasound team as the smaller Perth hospital, followed suit in 1977. In 1978, the
Queen Mother's Hospital also joined in, formally instituting a screening policy. What is
significant about these early adoptions of screening policies is that they occurred before the
introduction ofreal-time equipment - these routines were established using static B-scan
machines. 13 Thus it is clear that the desire or interest to apply ultrasound universally existed
before RT equipment was introduced into clinical use. This highlights therefore that although
routinisation was very strongly associated with real-time equipment, it was not dependent upon
it.
The strong connection between RT and the routine use of ultrasound is well documented, both
by the professions directly involved as well as a number of later commentators. Within the
version commonly espoused by the obstetric ultrasound community, (which is recounted in the
'history' sections of government advisory documents and reports from professional bodies, as
well as numerous retrospective articles) the smaller, lighter and easier-to-use real-time
machines effectively caused the development of ultrasound screening. The following, for
example, is from a Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) working patty
report on routine ultrasound from 1984:
The introduction of the linear array real-time scanner in the mid 1970s was
the trigger for an explosion in the amount of ultrasound imaging
performed during the antenatal period.... Obstetricians began to introduce
routine scanning of all pregnant women... [emphasis added] 14
13 Although RT machines were introduced into the Queen Mother's around this time, it is clear that they were not
initially used in regular clinical practice at the hospital (see Chapter 3).
14 RCOG, (1984), 'Report of the RCOG working party' pp. 2-3.
205
However, these examples of institutions which began the universal screening of pregnancy with
static B-scan equipment suggest that the relationship between RT and screening should be
viewed as an inter-related, rather than causal, one. The introduction of RT did have a significant
impact on the development of screening policies - adding impetus to those already in place,
while undoubtedly facilitating the evolution of screening in smaller, or more remote centres.
Nevertheless, screening policies were in place before the arrival ofRT, while the particular
requirements of universal screening helped to shape further technical changes in the equipment
on offer and to consolidate the success ofthe linear-array RT design.
By 1983, according to the RCOG working party report, 66% of Scottish hospitals offered every
pregnant woman at least one routine scan. IS This included all ofthe case-study centres
examined in this thesis except one - Aberdeen Maternity Hospital did not institute such a
service until 1986 and, as such, was one ofthe last Scottish hospitals to do so. This raises a
second significant point in relation to the development pattern of routine obstetric scanning.
Writers such as McKinlay and Banta have noted that new innovations in medicine tend to
diffuse first amongst the large tertiary establishments - especially teaching hospitals with links
to university funding and research - before they are adopted by smaller, district general
hospitals.I6
However, it was Perth Royal Infirmary, a small, local provider, which was first to
develop an ultrasound screening programme, while one of Scotland's largest tertiary referral
centres (Aberdeen Maternity) was one of the last. This suggests that such generalisations should
be approached with caution as they may obscure more than they reveal.
In the case ofPerth, for example, a closer examination ofthe context within which ultrasound
screening developed reveals many of the factors which contributed to its early move in this
direction. First of all, PRI was closely connected with Ninewells Hospital in the nearby city of
Dundee. Thus, while not itself a tertiary referral centre, PRI did have access to research staff
15 ibid., pA.
16 Banta, H.D., (1980), 'The diffusion ofthe computed tomography (CT) scanner in the United States'
Internationaljournal ofhealth sel1l ices, Vol. 10, No.2., pp. 251-69; McKinlay, J.B., (1981), 'From "promising
report" to "standard procedure'''.
206
and also played a role in medical training. More significantly, PRI and Ninewells shared the
same ultrasound personnel, led by Sandy Christie, who worked between the two institutions.
According to Christie, the lower delivery rate in Perth (around 1200 per year in the 1970s, in
comparison to Ninewells' roughly 3800) made the smaller maternity hospital the ideal location
for him to try out new practices and procedures. In Christie's words, he used Perth as a 'pilot
unit' and those practices that worked would then be transferred to the larger hospital in
Dundee.17
Furthermore, PRJ had better access to funds for the purchase of medical equipment
through the patronage of a local Trust Fund (The Gannachy Trust) provided by the whisky
company Bell's, which was based in the town. According to Sandy Christie, this often enabled
Perth to acquire new forms of equipment (such as colour Doppler, for example) before some of
the large teaching hospitals. These local circumstances make Perth's early adoption of
ultrasound screening appear much less anomalous.
Similarly, the timing ofAberdeen's introduction of a routine screening policy is explicable
when examined in context. First of all, Dr Valerie Farr, who had headed the ultrasound team
since the departure of Christie in 1970, did not support the routine use of ultrasound:
To begin with I fought very strongly against routine scanning. I still don't
agree with it because it increases your workload unnecessarily - the more
you do, the more mistakes you're going to make. [...JI remember, when I
was a student, a physician saying he thought it was quite interesting that
the older and deafer physicians got, the more heart sound they could hear
and I suspect the same applies to ultrasound. The more you do, the more
you think you see.18
For Valerie Farr, therefore, the universal application of obstetric ultrasound was viewed as a
development that actually diminished the clinician's ability to diagnose pathological conditions,
rather than assist in identifying them. The view being voiced here is one of two closely-linked
discourses which could be used to oppose universal screening - i.e. that a higher volume of
17 Interview with Dr AD Christie, 10/12/97.
18 Interview with Dr Valerie Farr, 10/05/98.
207
cases would lead to greater numbers of 'false-positive' diagnoses of pathology, which would
then lead to yet-more monitoring. In other words, the time and energy expended on routine
ultrasound and follow-up could be better spent concentrating on cases in which either
symptoms or risk factors had been identified. The second discourse which, although similar,
actually makes an opposing argument, was that routine ultrasound would fail to spot pathology
as a result ofthe higher workload. In this case, the higher volume of 'normal' cases would lead
to a greater number of 'false-negative' diagnoses. Despite the apparent contradiction between
these two discourses, they were used simultaneously by Farr in her opposition to routine
ultrasound:
I'm all for using technology to help you but I see no point as a substitute.
Why scan 100% ofthe population when 95% ofbabies are perfectly
healthy and only 5% are abnormal? And the chances are you can't pick up
all those abnormalities - you've got to have a pretty high accuracy rate. If
you didn't scan any patient and you said, 'this baby's all right,' you'd be
95% right. If you can't work out what is a low risk pregnancy then you
shouldn't be an obstetrician! 19
Although Farr's views on routine ultrasound did not reflect the majority view on ultrasound at
the time, they were not unique. A number of obstetricians questioned the appropriateness of
routine screening, while a small number continued to question the technology's contribution to
obstetrics at al1.20
Nevertheless, the significance ofFarr's attitude was that it had a direct impact
on her own interactions with the technology and on the development of obstetric scanning in
Aberdeen. Her opinions carried significant weight because ofthe fact that none ofthe hospital's
obstetricians actually performed their own scans. Unlike, for example, the Queen Mother's
where all junior clinicians were encouraged to scan patients, ensuring a constant turnover of
clinical staff with scanning experience, none of the obstetricians in Aberdeen had any direct
experience of scanning. Thus Aberdeen had no obstetricians who were trained to use the
19 Interview with Dr Valerie Farr, 10105/98.
20 One such clinician in Kirkcaldy refused to participate in the routine screening programme introduced there in
1982 and thus women's exposure to routine obstetric ultrasound was conditioned by which clinician was
responsible for their overall care.
208
technology, the scanning team being comprised only of Farr (who, as noted in Chapter 3, was
not a trained obstetrician), a technician and a radiographer. For this reason, it can be suggested
that her views on what could (and could not) be achieved through routine ultrasound were
given considerable credence.
A change in clinical staff, beginning in 1985, however, signalled a watershed period for
obstetric ultrasound in Aberdeen. Within a year three new clinicians had arrived at the hospital
- a new Professor of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Allen Templeton and two obstetricians (Dr
Norman Smith and Dr Patricia Smith). Both ofthe Doctors Smith had came directly from the
Queen Mother's Hospital, where they had been trained to use obstetric ultrasound by Margaret
McNay. They had also therefore worked in an institution that valued the routine use of obstetric
ultrasound. Thus the arrival of younger clinicians with first-hand experience of ultrasound,
marked a decisive shift in the way the technology was perceived.
There was, however, also a more economic reason for the timing of routine ultrasound's
introduction in Aberdeen. Although a dedicated scan room had been constructed when obstetric
ultrasound was first introduced to Aberdeen in 1967, this had been designed for the
requirements of a single static B-scanner.21 Thus the small amount of hospital space that was
made available for ultrasound scanning acted as a constraint on the expansion of the service and
increased volume of work associated with screening. In 1985, however, some adverse local
publicity about under-resourcing ofthe maternity hospital (particularly in terms of bed space
and facilities) prompted the Health Board to release extra funds for the hospital's budget.22
Nevertheless, the fact that the construction of a new Ultrasound Depmiment (officially opened
on April 1st 1986) was the first fruits ofthis investment, is probably also a result of the interests
ofthe new clinical management.
Thus when examined in context, it is clear that a variety of factors affected the timing and
manner ofthe introduction of routine ultrasound screening in individual hospitals, and that it
21 See chapter 2.
22 Telephone interview with Professor Allan Templeton, 05/09/99.
209
was not simply a result of the type or size of each. Thus generalisations such as those of
McKinlay or Banta actually serve to obscure the heterogeneity which is evident in the diffusion
of practices such as this.
Another noteworthy feature of the general pattern of diffusion of ultrasound screening practices
lay in the variety ofprocedures adopted. Most institutions such as the Queen Mother's, Forth
Park in Kirkcaldy, Ninewells, the Lewis Hospital and Aberdeen Maternity, began cautiously by
offering a single routine scan. However, while some went on to introduce an additional routine
scan, others maintained a single scan policy. Perth, once again, was the most anomalous,
offering no less than three routine scans from the very start of their service. Furthermore,
differences can also be clearly observed in terms of when a scan would be offered. In 1983 for
example, ofthose hospitals offering a single scan, just over half opted for a late first trimester
scan (between 10 and 12 weeks gestation), usually when the patient was booked. The remainder
offered their single scan at around 16 weeks gestation.23
Similarly, of those who offered two
routine examinations, the majority opted for a booking scan plus a second scan, although the
timing ofthis could be anywhere between 16 and 21 weeks gestation.24
The main exception to
this strategy was the Lewis Hospital, which offered its routine scans at 16 and 32 weeks. Once
more however, this difference can only be explained by examining the development ofeach
screening policy in context.
Offering a routine scan late in the first trimester had both practical and clinical value. In
practical terms, pregnant women were normally booked in under a Consultant Obstetrician at
this time. This constituted a pregnant woman's first hospital antenatal appointment, when she
would be examined by a doctor and have her obstetric history recorded. It was thus
administratively practical to include a routine ultrasound scan at this time, obviating the need
for women to return to the hospital at a later date. A number of pieces ofclinical information
could be garnered from a scan at this point in pregnancy. The on-going status of the pregnancy
23 Scottish Home and Health Department/Scottish Health Service Planning Council, (1988), 'Obstetric ultrasound
in Scotland' p. 18.
24 ibid.
210
could be confirmed, multiple gestations diagnosed, placental location noted and fetal
measurements taken (principally crown-rump length (CRL) and bi-parietal diameter (BPD)).
This early scan could not, however, be used to detect any but the most severe forms offetal
malformations - the fetus was simply too small and many ofthe organs would not be
sufficiently developed to be examined. Furthermore, a low-lying placenta at this stage in
pregnancy was a much less reliable indicator of the potential development of placenta praevia
than those observed later in the second trimester.
There was a much greater chance of observing such defects in those institutions where a single
scan was conducted at (or just before) 16 weeks. There was, however, a trade-offto be made
here. The pregnancy's duration would be provisionally calculated via the dating oflast
menstrual period (LMP), which would be used to determine when the scan was to be
performed. Ifthis estimate was wrong (which could happen if, for example, the woman had
recently been using oral contraceptives, or had irregular periods) then the optimum period for
drawing blood for maternal serum alpha fetoprotein (MSAFP) testing (16-18 weeks) might
have passed. Furthermore, from roughly 16 weeks onwards fetal measurements became
increasingly less predictive as it was generally accepted that fetal growth rates began to vary
from the latter half of the second trimester.25
There were thus advantages and disadvantages associated with each of these scanning times.
Which ofthese two options was chosen itself depended on a number of factors, including local
circumstances. In the Western Isles for example (as noted in Chapter 3), the later 16 week scan
was preferred when a single scan routine was in operation, and this was in direct response to the
Consultant Obstetrician's assessment ofthe deficiencies of his equipment. However, given the
difficulty of local travel arrangements, the clinician needed to keep the frequency of
appointments to a minimum and so he reorganised his booking clinics to coincide with the 16
25 The accuracy of fetal biparietal diameter measurements for the estimation of gestational age is generally
considered to decrease from +1- 1.1 weeks (when the measurement is taken at 14-20 weeks gestation) to +1- 1.6
weeks (from 20-26 weeks gestation), and to +1- 3.4 weeks (after 30 weeks gestation). See
www.medicine.creighton.edu/radiology/ultraoffetalbiomet (accessed 1119/02).
211
week scan. In the Queen Mother's, on the other hand, it is possible to suggest two reasons for
their opting for an early booking scan as routine. Firstly, they were at this time using static B-
scan machines with their superior image quality. Thus the detail which could be observed at 12
weeks gestation (by highly skilled staff in an ultrasound centre of excellence) would not
perhaps be greatly improved upon if scanning were delayed for another month. Furthermore, it
is possible to argue that the Queen Mother's had an institutional commitment to ultrasonically
determined gestational dating. The huge amount of work done in the hospital by the stafffrom
the late 1960s onwards on fetal cephalometry in particular, suggests that they placed a high
value on acquiring early and accurate ultrasound dating ofpregnancy,z6 Indeed, the importance
ofthis as the main underlying reason for performing routine ultrasound is reflected in the views
of the Queen Mother's staff. According to Dr Margaret McNay, for example:
I think one ofthe main problems still is that people do not know how far
on [in the pregnancy] they are. Judging simply by the last menstrual period
is not an accurate assumption, and therefore I think for everyone to be
scanned for dating is a very sensible idea.27
Finally, the centre that handled all MSAFP tests for the West of Scotland (The Duncan Guthrie
Institute of Medical Genetics) shared the same Yorkhill site as the Queen Mother's. The close
relationship which existed between these two centres in terms of genetic screening,
amniocentesis, etc. means that it was probably prudent that the Queen Mother's, of all places,
got their samples ofmaternal blood drawn at the correct time.
However, in relation to the timing ofMSAFP tests it is evident that there was no clear cut
consensus on which scan time was most appropriate. Actors both from centres that operated a
10-12 week policy, and those which scanned at around 16 weeks, cite timing ofMSAFP as an
26 These include Hall, A.1., Fleming, 1.E.E. & Abdulla, u., (1970), 'Ultrasonic fetal cephalometry: some
improvements and future developments' Ultrasonics, Vol. 8., pp. 34-5; Robinson, H.P. & Fleming, J.E.E., (1975),
'A critical evaluation of sonar "crown-rump" length measurements' BritishjOllrnal ofobstetrics and gynaecology,
Vol. 82, No.9, pp. 702-10; Hall, A.J. & Fleming, J.E.E., (1980), 'A coded cephalometer for multiple
measurements of biparietal diameter' Ultrasound in medicine and biology, Vol. 6, pp. 285-9.
27 Interview with Dr Margaret McNay, 05/11/97.
212
important influence on their policy. At Forth Park Maternity Hospital, for example, the later
single scan at 16 weeks was initially preferred. According to Dr Michael Hill, one ofthe
consultant obstetricians at Forth Park since 1972 and now Chief Obstetrician at the hospital,
this was tied to their early involvement with the East of Scotland MSAFP Screening
Programme run from the Simpson's Maternity Hospital in Edinburgh.28
For many centres (including the Queen Mother's and Forth Park) the trade off between
achieving early and accurate ultrasonic estimation of gestational age and being able to clearly
visualise a number of fetal pathologies was overcome via the introduction of an additional scan.
During the 1980s, this second scan (anywhere from 16-21 weeks gestation) was increasingly
referred to as an anomaly or detailed scan and was the examination during which the fetus in
particular was given a 'full check-up'. The position of the placenta would also be assessed here
as low-lying placenta at this stage in pregnancy provided a better prediction of the potential
development of placenta praevia than it did during the first trimester. Nevertheless, the fetus
was by far the main object ofthe medical gaze during this scan, and its major organs, structures
and overall 'wellbeing' would be assessed, measured and scrutinised. It is important to note that
this examination was extremely technology-dependant. The detail sought in such scans was
reliant upon equipment that provided good image resolution, and also upon the skills ofthe
operator. Thus the number of checks made and details examined increased throughout the
1980s as both the resolution of images improved and the expertise of staff increased. Thus by
the mid 1980s a number of routine strategies were employed - a single scan at 10-12 weeks, a
single scan at around 16 weeks, or a booking and an anomaly scan at 16-21 weeks, or a 16
week scan and a 32 week scan. And then there was Perth - the first centre to develop an
ultrasound screening policy and the only Scottish hospital to ever offer three scans to every
pregnant woman - one at booking, one at 19 weeks and one at 36 weeks. This requires
explanation.
First of all, the small number of maternity patients involved (in relation to Dundee) probably
meant that the scan team which worked between the two hospitals (Christie and two assistants)
28 Interview with Dr Michael Hill, July 1996.
213
had more scope in which to develop a comprehensive service at Perth. Furthermore, as with the
Queen Mother's, and unlike Ninewells, PRI dealt only with obstetric cases - the only
gynaecological examinations carried out were those associated with early pregnancy.29 Thus not
only were patient numbers relatively small, the range of cases to be examined was also more
limited. Therefore it can perhaps be suggested that a smaller patient population of virtually
exclusive maternity cases, provided the perfect opportunity for Christie and his team to explore
the full potential of universal screening. As already noted, Christie tended to use Perth as a pilot
study for the larger hospital but the same difference in patient numbers which led him to do so
perhaps also meant that some practices could not be transferred so easily to Ninewells. Indeed,
when Ninewells began its routine scanning, some two years after Perth, a single examination
was offered - at 19 weeks. The larger volume, and greater range, of cases in Dundee, led
Christie to opt for what he perceived to be the most clinically useful of the three routine scans
performed in Perth.
However, a factor ofperhaps greater significance was Christie himself. As the only medical
physicist in Scotland who headed an ultrasound scanning team, Christie's position vis avis the
technology was markedly different from other workers in the field. By virtue of the fact that he
was not a clinician, none of his time was claimed by other clinical work - he was exclusively an
ultrasound specialist - or, as he prefers to name it, an 'ultrasonologist'.30 His sole role when
visiting the Pe11h hospital was to scan obstetric patients and thus Christie essentially had a
freedom of action not afforded to many other ultrasound workers at that time. In this way it is
possible to suggest that actors in other institutions may also have preferred to perform greater
numbers of routine scans had circumstances enabled them to do so. Indeed, Jack Crichton in the
Western Isles, in a letter to one ofthe GPs who performed routine ultrasound in the peripheral
clinic on Benbecula, expressed this very sentiment:
With regard to when patients should be screened, I would like you to carry
out basic scanning at between 16 and 18 weeks and at about 32 weeks.
This is the screening that I am doing in Stornoway, and it is essentially a
29 Interview with Dr AD Christie, 10112/97.
30 Ibid.
214
compromise dictated by the logistics ofthe situation. Had I time, I would
also like to scan the patients between 17 and 18 or even up to 19 weeks
when there is a lot of more interesting detail to be seen and had I even
more time, I would also like to scan patients at about 30 and 34 or 35
weeks. So for the moment, providing you can do the basics in the second
trimester and third trimester, they can have as many additional scans as
you have time for. It is interesting to look at the foetus about 18 or 19
weeks.3l
More than this, however, as a medical physicist (and, indeed, one who had been an electronics
engineer until a decade previously) Christie was much more technology-minded than many of
his clinical peers. The specialist area ofmedical physics prided itself on its innovative
practices: developing new procedures and manipulating equipment to try new things.32 This
sentiment is reflected in Christie's own view of his role, which can be inferred from the
following (somewhat disparaging) comments on radiographers and midwives:
we [the scan team at Ninewells] have always believed that radiographers
and midwives can be trained by their doctors (or whoever's training them)
up to a certain level to do what they are told to do, but they are not, and
never will be, innovators. They will never be developers because it's not in
their nature or in their remit to be developers.33
However, Christie's love of technology went beyond this. As a non-clinician with an
authoritative position in charge of an ultrasound team, he was much more inclined to favour
ultrasound diagnosis over all other forms of clinical knowledge. This is clearly evident in his
views on the value of routine scanning:
And then there was the argument that I always, that I didn't believe in,
'why scan everybody when most of them are low risk pregnancies?'. And
my opinion ofthat is, 'how do you know it's a low-risk pregnancy?'.
Nobody knows that - it's just ridiculous.... I'm not saying ultrasound
solves all the problems, but what I am saying is that ultrasound reveals
problems that you did not know were there. It's a very simple maxim - if
31 Letter from Dr Jack Crichton to Dr Louise Hodgeson, 13 March 1987 (JC Correspondence, Western Isles Box,
BMUS Hist Coil.)
32 This is also evident in the comments made by Professor John Mallard in Chapter 2.
33 Interview with Dr AD Christie, 10/]2/97.
215
you don't look you'll never see, so why not look? I mean, any fool can
guess about a pregnancy - the patient needn't even come into the hospital,
you can talk to her on the phone, 'how are you?' 'Fine.' 'Fine - it's a low
risk pregnancy' - it's ridiculous!34
Thus while clinicians who were involved with ultrasound screening were more likely to
emphasise its contribution to the medical management of pregnancy (in conjunction with an
array of clinical, diagnostic practices) on a more general level, Christie's attitude could be
described as more technology-dependent. That is not to suggest that he believed ultrasound
replaced or superseded all other forms of clinical diagnostics, but simply to make the point that
his extensive knowledge of ultrasound, and lack of expertise in other forms of clinical practice,
predisposed him to ultrasonic evaluation of all pregnancies. 35
The importance of Christie's professional background in engineering and medical physics in
this context ties in with another feature ofthe heterogeneity of screening practices developed in
Scottish hospitals - operating personnel. The increased workload associated with screening
every pregnancy (as opposed to selective cases) brought with it a demand for greater numbers
of operating staff. However, clear differences emerged between locations in terms of the kind of
personnel used. Indeed, Scotland appears to have exhibited the greatest degree of diversity in
this context. The RCOG working party report on routine obstetric ultrasound published in 1984,
made use oftwo surveys ofscanning personnel carried out in Scotland and the South East
Thames region of England.36 The findings (although described in the report as being 'broadly
similar,3?) show marked differences in the distribution of scanning commitments amongst the
various groups (see Table 4.1).
34 Ibid.
35 Indeed, in another interview he criticised doctors who abandoned their clinical judgment to ultrasonic
measurement ofBPD in deciding when to induce pregnancy. (Dr AD Christie, interviewed by Ian Spencer and
John Fleming, courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer & Fleming, transcript pS.)
36 RCOG, (1984), 'Report ofthe RCOG working party' pp. 8-9 & Table 2.1, Figure I (p. 26) & Figure 3 (p.28).
37 ibid. p.8.
216
Figure 4.1: Number of antenatal scanning sessions performed by different groups of workers in Scotland
and the South East Thames region.
No Obstetric Radiographer Radiologist Obstetrician Midwife Others
Deliveries! scanning
year patients!
week
Scotland 66.000 368 165(45%) 32(9%) 93(25%) 16(4%) 61(17%)
SE Thames 45,000 197 120(60%) 14(7%) 35(18%) 18(9%) 10(5%)
(from RCOG, (1984), 'Routine ultrasound examination in pregnancy,' p. 26.)
Most striking are the significantly higher number of scanning sessions performed in England by
radiographers (60%, compared to 45% in Scotland), and the lower number of obstetricians
performing scans (18%, compared to Scotland's 25%). Also noteworthy is the much higher
incidence of scanning sessions being performed by 'others' in Scotland (largely general
practitioners, clinical assistants, technicians and medical physicists). Thus, as the RCOG report
fails to note (but which is reported in the later NMCC report published in Scotland38
)
radiological staff (radiographers and radiologists) were much less dominant in antenatal
screening in Scotland than in England. Once more, the wide variations between individual
hospitals in terms of personnel can only be explained through reference to local context.
In both Perth and Dundee, medically trained staff were employed as clinical assistants in
Christie's team. These workers, however, were not qualified obstetricians but medical
graduates employed exclusively as ultrasound operators, and both Perth and Dundee continued
to rely on such personnel.39
However, unlike many ofthe junior medics who used the
technology in hospitals such as the Queen Mother's, Perth and Dundee's clinical assistants did
not undertake ultrasound as part of any training for higher posts; instead they were employed
solely as ultrasound operatives. The fact that these clinical assistants were women, employed on
a part-time basis, suggests that a specific pool of available labour, in the form of medical
graduates with family commitments, was being tapped in Perth and Dundee. This however
cannot fully explain why these two hospitals developed such a unique division of labour.
38 Scottish Home and Health Department/Scottish Health Service Planning Council, (1988), 'Obstetric ultrasound
in Scotland' p. 22.
39 In the early 1990s the close affinity between the two institutions was severed and they became governed by two
separate Health Trusts. Dundee continued to enjoy the services of Christie's team, while Perth's obstetric
ultrasound service was taken over by The Department of Radiology (which was renamed as the Department of
Medical Imaging). Interview with Dr AD Christie, 10/12/97.
217
According to Christie, the availability of such workers was coupled with an actual preference of
the consultants at Perth and Dundee (as well as himself) for medically-trained personnel over
radiographers, midwives or technicians. For Christie at least, it was the perception that lower
grade staff were unable to develop innovative practices which led him to favour medically
qualified operators.
However, in light of Christie's own background, this preference seems somewhat odd. He
himself had no medical training and his knowledge of obstetrics was confined to his knowledge
of obstetric ultrasound.40 Instead, it could be suggested that Perth and Dundee's use ofthis kind
of personnel was directly related to the prominent role that Christie occupied. None ofthe
consultants in either hospital scanned their own patients and thus, like Valerie Farr in
Aberdeen, Christie was in overall control of a clinical technology with which the hospitals
obstetricians were not as experienced. However, as a non-clinician Christie was not essentially
qualified to make diagnoses. Thus, it could be suggested that the employment of clinical staff
(i.e. personnel with medical training) enabled that particular clinical obstacle to be overcome.
Indeed, Valerie Farr claims that this was one of the reasons why she was appointed to the
Aberdeen scan team (following the departure of Dr Sandy MacIntosh) during Christie's
employment there. According to Farr, Christie had to be assisted by a clinician, but there were
no willing volunteers from amongst the obstetrics staff.41
At the Queen Mother's, the staff who initially carried out routine scanning were also medically
qualified, but the vast majority were consultant obstetricians scanning their own patients, or
junior doctors undertaking research for MDs or, later, registrars seeking membership ofthe
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Gradually, however, midwives were
employed in this capacity and this group had taken over much ofthe routine workload by the
middle of the 1980s.
40 See Chapter 2 for a fuller account of Christie's early career in ultrasound. Although Christie was given some
degree of clinical knowledge by the Obstetrics Professors in both Aberdeen and Dundee, this was nevertheless
geared at instilling in him an awareness ofthe clinical and physical aspects ofthe structures he was viewing with
ultrasound. Furthermore, John Mallard hints that this 'obstetric training' may have been instigated more by Christie
himself, than the obstetricians involved.
41 Interview with Dr Valerie Farr, 10105/98.
218
The fact that additional staff was drawn from midwifery in this case, was related to the
institutional independence ofthe QMH ultrasound service from radiology. Because the
obstetric scanning service was geographically separate from the Western Infirmary, and was
operated entirely by obstetrics, there was never any radiological involvement with obstetric
ultrasound at the Queen Mother's. Thus despite the fact that gynaecology scanning was mainly
under the control of radiology in the Western Infirmary, and that obstetric ultrasound in the
city's other main maternity hospital (the Royal Maternity in Rottenrow) had been run by the
radiology department since Donald's obstetric beds had relocated to the Queen Mother's in
1964, the QMH service was a resolutely obstetrician-led practice. This entailed that the Queen
Mother's did not really have the access to radiological staff for scanning - whereas there was
scope to introduce midwives to ultrasound.
This was also the case in Aberdeen, where midwives were introduced into the scan team to
carry out the vast majority ofroutine examinations. Once again, institutional independence and
the location of the Ultrasound Department within the maternity hospital help to explain this
development. It is also evident that many clinicians and midwives in centres where midwives
operated the technology felt that there was something particularly advantageous about drawing
on this group. In particular, midwives were felt to provide a more holistic approach to scanning.
According to Margaret McNay, for example, midwives are better equipped to discuss wider
issues with pregnant women, as well as those which arise from the scan itself:
there is no doubt that your midwife, by nature of her training, she knows
far more about the pregnancy than your average radiographer will. [W]hen
you are scanning, you're often having a chat with the patient and you are
not just pointing out the fetus, but its an opportunity for [the patient] to be
in a relatively pleasant relaxed atmosphere and maybe [she] will be more
ready to ask questions about other things, unrelated actually to the scan. If
somebody brings up questions about other aspects of antenatal care then
she [the midwife] ought to be able to answer these whereas your
radiographer may not.42
42 Interview with Dr M McNay, 05/11/97.
219
Furthermore, the presence of a midwife as sonographer was also considered advantageous when
abnormal findings from ultrasound screening were discussed with patients. Professor Allen
Templeton, for example, cited this as a major reason for introducing midwives to ultrasound in
Aberdeen:
[Midwives] could be trained just like anyone else, but the more important
issue was that they could interact with the patient much better. Particularly
in later scans where a problem ensued, quite often if a radiologist or
radiographer was doing the scan, they would feel uncomfortable having
any conversation about the implications ofthe finding, particularly if it
showed an abnormality of any sort. So it was really, I felt the midwives
would be better all-round at counselling and so forth.43
Similar points were also made by the midwives themselves who participated in ultrasound
screening, all of whom mentioned their 'holistic' approach.44 Edward Yoxen, however, (as
mentioned in the Introduction ofthis thesis) has noted elsewhere that midwives in some
hospitals in England were hostile to the idea ofparticipating in ultrasound scanning, claiming
that it would diminish their skills as midwives.45 The sentiments expressed by midwives who
performed ultrasound, cannot therefore be taken as representative of a general attitude amongst
this professional group. Instead, their attitudes were themselves grounded in their involvement
with the technology. Their actual experience with the technology led them to recognise certain
aspects of their professional training as useful and valuable in their role as scan operators. For
this reason, both the attitudes of midwives who performed ultrasound, and the reasons they give
for their greater suitability, should perhaps be viewed as an outcome of their involvement with
the practice, rather than a cause.
Furthermore, the comments noted above should not be regarded as an indication that
radiographers were considered unsuitable for the job of scanning. While some actors did
43 Telephone interview with Professor Allen Templeton, 5/3/99.
44 Sister Grace Porter, for example, noted that while abnormalities are explained to patients by clinicians, the
midwife scan-operator is 'often left then to explain again'. (Interview with Sister Grace Porter, 01/04/98).
"5 Yoxen, E., (1987), 'Seeing with sound: a study ofthe development of medical images' in Bijker, W.E., Hughes,
T.P. & Pinch, T.1., (eds.), The social constl1lction oftechnological systems, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp.
281-2.
220
consider this to be the case (including, for example, Sandy Christie, Jack Crichton and Allen
Templeton) others argued that what radiographers lacked in terms oftheir knowledge of
pregnancy, was offset by their fuller technical understanding ofthe technology.46 Those
radiographers interviewed in Kirkcaldy, for example, highlighted that their greater
understanding ofhow ultrasound images were produced, and ofthe technical advantages and
disadvantages of a particular machine, in comparison to midwives, led to a heightened ability to
get the best images from the equipment in use.47
Finally, the employment ofGPs as ultrasound operators in the Western Isles provides another
example ofthe varied mix of personnel employed in ultrasound screening. Here again, this is
only explicable in terms of local circumstances. First of all, and most importantly, the
geographical difficulties associated with the Western Isles (as outlined in Chapter 3) presented
problems for any attempt to screen all women in the Health Board region within the hospital
itself. Furthermore, as a lone consultant Crichton was only able to visit the peripheral clinic on
Benbecula once every six weeks - not frequently enough therefore to ensure pregnancies were
screened at the desired time of 16 weeks gestation. Thus the use of local GPs was a practical
solution in the circumstances. In addition, the extension of the service to GP practices in other
areas was an historically and contextually emergent development. Those GPs who came on
board (Dr Bickle in Barra in 1987 and Dr Ratchford in Ness in 1988) were based in the most
remote areas of the Isles48 and had an interest in obstetric medicine. Thus, despite the fact that
community-based obstetric scanning operated by unsupervised general practitioners was highly
unusual, this service, when placed within the particular local circumstances from which it
evolved, made sense on a practical basis.
In summary, there was no universal 'standard procedure' or 'routine' for antenatal screening
with ultrasound. Hospitals that operated such policies differed from one another in a number of
key areas - number of scans pelformed, timing of antenatal screening and personnel operating
46 Margaret McNay expressed this point, as did the midwives and radiographers interviewed.
47 Interview with Mrs Eleanor Young, July 1996; interview with Mrs Enid Barker, July 1996.
48 Castlebay on Barra is the most southerly community habitation in the Isles, while Ness at the top of Lewis, is the
most northerly.
221
the technology. However, what is evident is that, while each centre developed very different
forms of routine procedure, all can be seen as emerging from the particular circumstances and
factors associated with each location. Thus, although it is difficult to make out a specific
pattern, the procedures adopted in each centre made sense on an individual level, located fully
within their historical and locational context.
However, by the mid 1980s, when it was estimated that some 70% ofpregnant women were
exposed to routine ultrasound49
, this lack of uniformity began to become an issue of concern to
both the state and professional bodies such as RCOG. The worry appears to have been that
diversity was symptomatic of the unregulated growth ofroutine screening practices, which
might result in a lack of universal standards and thus doubts regarding quality of care on a more
general level. In particular, the ever-increasing use of lower grade staff such as midwives and
radiographers, raised fears that supervision and training of such workers might not be sufficient.
Attempts, therefore, to create a more uniform 'standard procedure' in the routine application of
ultrasound were made on two fronts - uniformity of delivery and uniformity of training. When
discussions and debates over how best to achieve this were at their height, however, the safety
of obstetric ultrasound erupted as a matter of considerable public debate. As safety is one ofthe
fundamental issues which underpins any screening technique, this debate marked a crisis in the
development and use of routine ultrasound. It is therefore worth considering the responses to
this crisis in some detail.
The safety debate
Safety scares attached to medical interventions are always controversial, but this is particularly
true ofthose associated with pregnancy where the moral and emotional stakes are, arguably,
higher. In 1962, for example, the discovery that the drug Thalidomide (administered to pregnant
women to counteract morning sickness) caused severe birth defects, resulted in a huge public
outcry and the rapid international withdrawal ofthe drug. Nevertheless, how a potentially
hazardous technology will fare in such circumstances is historically contingent and dependant
49 Scottish Home and Health Department/Scottish Health Service Planning Council, (1988), 'Obstetric ultrasound
in Scotland' p. 16.
222
upon the availability of alternative techniques. For example, x-ray imaging of the pregnant
uterus continued to be performed for a number of conditions following the publication of Alice
Stewart et ai's research linking it to childhood cancer.50 Prior to the introduction of ultrasound,
for example, x-rays were used to confirm suspected diagnoses oftwin pregnancies.51
X-ray
pelvimetry was also practised well into the 1980s, if it was suspected that vaginal delivery
might be problematic.52
In both of these examples, the possible hazards associated with the
delivery of such cases were considered to outweigh any hazard associated with the technology.
However, when a technology is employed for screening purposes the threshold of acceptable
risk is substantially lower. The fact that whole populations are exposed, and that a considerable
proportion ofthese are expected to be 'healthy', entails that the safety ofthe tool used is
paramount. Thus, as both an obstetric technology and one used to screen all pregnant women, it
was inevitable that any concerns raised over the safety of ultrasound as a procedure would pose
a significant threat to its continued use.
On May 10th 1984, an ITN 'News at One' programme reported on a meeting ofthe National
Childbirth Trust where concern over the use ofultrasound on pregnant women was raised. This
meeting was, in turn, prompted by a number of research papers suggesting that diagnostic
ultrasound might have harmful biological effects on the fetus. In particular, a group of
researchers at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York conducted a number of in vitro
experiments using both mouse and human cells, and reported chromosomal and morphological
50 Stewart, A., Webb, J., Giles, D., Hewett, D., (1956), 'Malignant disease in childhood and diagnostic irradiation
in utero' Lancet, Vol. 2., p.447.
51 Two of the hospitals in this study continued to perform x-ray imaging for the confirmation of multiple pregnancy
after ultrasound was introduced, if the results from the scan were ambiguous. It should also be noted that x-rays are
still used to image the fetus, although this has become a very rare practice, and is only performed during late
pregnancy.
52 Ultrasound technology was ill-suited for measuring the pelvis (because of its bony structure) until the
introduction of trans-vaginal probes. For a more detailed history of the development of pelvimetry see Hiddinga,
A., (1992), 'X-ray technology in obstetrics: measuring pelves at the Yale School of Medicine' in Pickstone, J. Y.,
(ed.), Medical innovations in historical perspective, St. Martins Press, New York; Hiddinga, A. & Blume, S.S.,
(1992), 'Technology, science and obstetric practice: the origins and transformation of cephalopelvimetry' Science,
lechnology and human values, Vol. 17, pp.154-179.
223
changes in cells exposed to ultrasound from diagnostic equipment.53 In response to these
reports, the National Institutes of Health in the USA, the World Health Organisation (WHO)
and the Danish Minister ofthe Interior had all issued guidelines and statements declaring that
the routine use of ultrasound on all pregnant women should not be practised. However, it was
the broadcast ofthe ITN news item that really signalled the start ofthe debate in the UK.
The response ofthe ultrasound community in Britain, at least as it was represented in the
British Medical Ultrasound Society (BMUS), appears initially to have been somewhat
dismissive ofthe issue. In the August edition ofthe Bulletin, for example, the President of
BMUS, Tony Whittingham, criticised what he perceived to be the alarmist nature ofthe news
report:
Although the programme contained little to which an informed and very
attentive viewer could take exception, the mere mention of emotive words
such as cancer and deformities might well have been expected to cause
consternation in Mrs Public, halfwatching the telly over her ironing
board.54
It must be borne in mind that for many ofthose most active in the field (including the
incumbent BMUS President) these research findings were not a major revelation. The research
had been published in the medical literature a few years earlier and most actors involved in the
further development of ultrasound technology were familiar with it. They were also familiar
with the many other experimental studies which reported no significant biological effects from
the use of pulsed ultrasound, as well as the methodological problems associated with relating
the results of in vivo animal studies and in vitro experiments to the use ofdiagnostic ultrasound
53 Liebeskind, D.E., Bases, R., Elequin, F., Neubort, S., Leifer, R., Goldberg, R., Koenigsberg, M., (1979a),
'Diagnostic ultrasound: effects on the DNA and growth patterns of animal cells' Radiology, Vol. 131, pp. 177-84;
Liebeskind, D.E., Baes, R., Mendez, F., Eiequin, F., Koenigberg, M., (1979b), 'Sister chromatid exchanges in
human lymphocytes after exposure to diagnostic ultrasound' Science, Vol. 205, pp. 1273-5; Liebeskind, D.,
Padawar, J., Wolley, R., Bases, R., (1982), 'Diagnostic ultrasound time lapse and transmission electron
microscopic studies of cells insonated in vitro' Britishjournal 0.(cancer, Vol. 45 (suppl.), pp. 176-86.
54 BMUS, (1984), Bulletin ofthe BMUS, No. 35, August, p.2.
224
in medicine.55
Perhaps more significantly, however, they were also able to draw on over 25
years of first-hand clinical experience with the technology, which had thus far revealed no
observable hazard to patients, their offspring, or operating personnel.
The debate, however, continued and was placed on a more formal public footing. In a written
response to a parliamentary question on the subject, the Junior Health Minister, John Patten,
made the following statement:
As the use ofultrasound is a matter for clinical judgement, such tests
should not therefore be performed as a matter of routine.56
Furthermore, the Minister advocated a wider review of the practice of routine scanning and
drew attention to the report on this matter currently being prepared by the RCOG Working
Party.57 The controversy continued to gain momentum. The Association for Improvements in
Maternity Services (AIMS) lobbied the Ministry for stronger action to restrict the practice of
obstetric ultrasound, while some pregnant women began asking questions about the necessity of
a scan, and ultrasound operators penned worried letters to BMUS regarding whether they
should continue to provide routine examinations. There were even claims that hospital appeals
for scanning equipment were affected, or cancelled altogether, as a result ofthe safety fears.
The matter came to a head (at least in terms of public debate) towards the end of 1984. On
October 22nd, the Daily Mail published a letter written by Patten to AIMS in which he stated
that 'we would not expect any Health Authority to be advocating screening for all mothers as a
routine procedure'.58 Furthermore, the Ministry persuaded the Medical Research Council to
organise a meeting ofUK ultrasound experts to discuss the risks and benefits of the
55 The conflicting scientific evidence was assessed (ultimately in ultrasound's favour) in a number of official
publications issued by a variety of bodies including the Medical Research Council and RCOO in the UK, and the
Federal Drug Administration and National Institutes of Health in the USA (RCOO, (1984), 'Report of the RCOO
working party' Appendix 2, pp. 50-73.)
56 John Patten, quoted in BMUS, (1984), Bulletin ofthe BMUS, No. 36, November, p.3.
57 RCOO, (1984), 'Report of the RCOO working party'. In light ofthe safety debate an appendix of some 15 pages
was devoted to an examination ofthe evidence.
58 Daily Mail, October 22nd 1984, quoted in BMUS, (1984), Bulletin ofthe BMUS, No. 36, November, p.3.
225
technology.59 In two television interviews that evening, the Junior Health Minister attempted to
elaborate the government's position:
Some other West European countries, like the Danes, have decided that
ultrasound should not be a technique which is used routinely, and the
World Health Organisation has said quite firmly that it does not think, at
the moment, that ultrasound and the evaluation of ultrasound is in such a
position that every mother should have it automatically, and I think that is
h " 60
very muc our posItlOn.
We are not stopping anyone in the country - I must stress that, anyone in
the country - having a scan ifher doctor says it's a good idea for her to
have a scan. All we are saying is that we do not want the NHS, the District
Health Authorities up and down the country, to go any further down the
road of developing this as a totally routine technique until we have had
this further examination [i.e. the MRC Review].61
It is evident, however, from the statements made by the government, that its position in this
matter was highly ambiguous. While the letter to AIMS suggests it did not want any health
authority to carry out ultrasound screening, the junior minister's television comments merely
indicate that health authorities should not go 'any further down the road of developing this as a
totally routine technique'. The implication ofthe latter comment is that those centres already
operating such policies could continue to do so. Thus while claiming to hold a position which
was in accordance with that of the World Health Organisation, the additional comments made
by the Junior Health Minister belied this sentiment. In short, through the use ofambiguous and
sometimes contradictory statements, the Ministry of Health appeared to criticise the routine use
of obstetric ultrasound while its safety was being questioned, but fell short of calling for a
temporary halt to the practice. Caught between the demands of medical professionals (who had
increasingly come to rely on the routine use of this technology as a central component of
59 The outcome ofthis meeing was published in 1986 (Medical Research Council, (1986), 'Report on an ad hoc
meeting on the risks and benefits of obstetric ultrasound' Medical Research Council, London).
60 Interview with John Patten on BBC '6 O'clock News', quoted in BMUS, (1984), Bulletin ofthe BMUS, No. 36,
November, p.3.
61 Interview with John Patten on lTV 'News at Ten', quoted in BMUS, (1984), Bulletin ofthe BMUS, No. 36,
November, p.3.
226
antenatal screening), and its desire to be seen to act responsibly by the public in light ofthe
safety controversy, the Ministry chose the time-honoured political option of 'fudging' the issue.
The ambiguity of the government's stance was not lost on the ultrasound community. In an
editorial ofthe BMUS Bulletin, for example, which spelled out the Society's advice to its
members, the President chose to emphasise parts ofthe Minister's comments and not others. In
addition to advising its members to ensure that all ultrasound examinations were performed on
the basis of 'informed consent' by the patient, BMUS also made full use ofthe unclear nature
of the Ministry's advice by appealing to 'clinical judgement':
It [the Department of Health] has clearly stated that it would not wish to
question a doctor's clinicaljudgement in favour of a scan, for any reason.
It should therefore be possible for a doctor to comply with the spirit ofthe
Minister's remarks and still have routine scans done on his patients,
provided he explains to them that, in hisjudgement, a routine scan is a
worthwhile check, even for an apparently problem free pregnancy, and
offers them the chance to say no. [Emphasis added]62
Thus, clinicians were advised that if they felt a routine ultrasound examination was a medically
justifiable procedure, and the patient consented, then they could continue to perform routine
scans without fear of contravening government advice. This amounted to an oft-used appeal to
the autonomy of the clinician in all matters relating to patient care. As with the framing ofthe
government's response to the question of risk, this appeal can be traced to the historical
relationship between the state and the medical profession in Britain. Medical autonomy over all
matters of patient care had been enshrined within both the panel system ofthe 1911 National
Insurance Act, and the setting up ofthe National Health Service in 1948. To gain the
profession's co-operation with these schemes both Lloyd George and Aneurin Bevan had to
overcome the medical community's hostility towards state regulation; a hostility acquired
through their experiences ofthe 19th century Friendly Societies and Poor Law Authorities.63
----"---------
62 ibid.
63 Stevens, R., (1966), Medical practice in modern England: the impact ofspecialization and state medicine, Yale
University Press, New Haven, Conn.
227
This was achieved by affording the profession full authority over the treatment of patients: the
state could not directly interfere with the doctor/patient relationship by demanding that certain
drugs, practices or technologies should or should not be used. Of course, the relationship
between the state and the medical profession was always historically contingent. Changes in the
organisation ofthe NHS (such as the introduction of Trusts and GP fundholding) were tied to
shifting power relations. Furthermore, the increasing prevalence of medical malpractice suits in
the late twentieth century also blurred the boundary between the state and the profession.
Nevertheless, the state's historically negotiated inability to dictate medical practice enabled the
profession to continue with routine scanning programmes - despite the existence of controversy
over the safety and appropriateness of the procedure.
With this in mind, it is perhaps unsurprising to observe that routine screening programmes
carried out in the Scottish hospitals in this study appear to have been unaffected by the safety
debate in the 1980s. Indeed, despite the explicit appeal ofthe Department of Health that routine
scanning should not be extended until the various bodies had reported their findings, both
Aberdeen Maternity Hospital and the Lewis Hospital in Stornoway extended their routine
services during this period. How can this situation be explained?
The screening of all pregnancies with diagnostic ultrasound had come to form one of the basic
components of antenatal care and management with numerous decisions such as when to
induce labour, whether to perform caesarean sections, whether to admit women for bedrest,
whether to offer a termination of pregnancy, etc. being based upon its findings. Thus practice
itself had become moulded around the technology and its routine use. In this way, it can be seen
that routine ultrasound had altered the nature of obstetric practice and, therefore, was not easy
to abandon. Furthermore, the particularities of each routine service had evolved from particular
local and historical contingencies. Each system had been shaped by a variety of factors and thus
it was grounded in its location as much as it was created from the historical processes from
which it emerged. Thus in the centres in which it was currently employed, it could not simply
be plucked from practice without having a fundamental affect on the administration and
organisation of antenatal provision.
228
Thus, in terms of its increasing ubiquity (both within individual centres and as a practice carried
out in a rising number of institutions) routine obstetric ultrasound was surprisingly unaffected
by the safety controversy. Even at the height ofthe dispute over safety, the policy of screening
all pregnant women continued, and indeed began to expand as more hospitals began their own
routine procedures. Nevertheless, there was one significant way in which this public attention
affected the technology. Confronted with unprecedented levels of media scrutiny and public
concern, advocates ofthe technology found themselves having to defend the routine use of
ultrasound in all pregnancies by explaining its benefits. This in turn emphasised the growing
perception that the organisation and delivery of ultrasound services needed to be standardised.
To be seen to be an effective screening tool, comparability in the technology's organisation and
regulation was required.
Standardisation or harmonisation? Regulating routine ultrasound
The first issue to be addressed by the ultrasound community related to the appropriate training
and supervision of scanning personnel. When assessing the delivery ofroutine ultrasound in the
UK, the RCOG working party on routine ultrasound was highly critical ofthe large volume of
work being undertaken by unsupervised radiographers. In their survey of the 191 hospital
districts in England (carried out in May 1984) they found that radiographers comprised 63% of
all scanning personnel, and that the vast majority ofthese (141 from a total of 183) performed
ultrasound without direct supervision.64
Furthermore, the South East Thames study indicated
that, despite the fact that only 7% of scan sessions were carried out by radiologists, nearly half
of all scanning sessions were performed in x-ray departments. This added to their concern that
there was not sufficient clinical support on hand for radiographers. When RCOG published its
report on routine ultrasound in 1986, one ofthe many recommendations made was that non-
medically qualified staff should be given greater support by clinicians (radiologists or
obstetricians). However, this amounted to a request that a Consultant undertake 'a regular
kl
. ,65
wee y scanmng seSSIOn .
64 RCOa, (1984), 'Report of the Rcoa working party' p.27, Table 2.2.
65 ibid., p. 21, Recommendation 3.
229
The situation in Scotland, however, was somewhat different. As noted in Table 4.1 above, a
smaller percentage ofradiographers were involved with obstetric ultrasound in comparison
with England. Furthermore, the vast majority of obstetric scans in Scotland (76%) were carried
out in obstetrics departments, while only 15% were conducted in x-ray departments.66
Thus, as
the case of Forth Park highlights, where radiographers were involved, this was often in
association with obstetrics. In Scotland, therefore, arrangements were more disparate, with
many hospitals conducting obstetric ultrasound within obstetric departments, but drawing on
both radiographical and obstetric staff, as well as a significant proportion of'other' staff (17%).
Thus in England, the greater centralisation of ultrasound services in x-ray departments and
using radiographical staffmeant that the appropriate regulation, supervision and training of
such staff was a more significant issue there than it was in Scotland. Thus, in its report the
RCOG Working Party advocated the introduction of a specialist qualification in obstetric
ultrasound, which should be held by all personnel conducting unsupervised scanning sessions.
This, in essence, amounted to a concession to the reality ofthe increasing involvement of non-
medical staff with the technology. The increased volume and repetitive nature ofthe work
associated with routine ultrasound screening, inevitably brought with it the continuing
delegation of such tasks to lower grade personnel.
Nevertheless, it is clear that the RCOG working party felt that ultrasound technology differed
from other imaging modalities such as radiography in a way that was not particularly suited to
such delegation:
The accuracy ofultrasound scanning is very dependent on the skill ofthe
doctor or technician performing the scan. This is more true for ultrasound
diagnosis than for other types of investigation such as biochemistry,
radiology or nuclear medicine where fairly standardised procedures are
adopted. Ultrasound demands the ability to interpret images and adapt the
scan technique, gain control and dynamic focus settings ofthe equipment,
66 Scottish Home and Health Department/Scottish Health Service Planning Council, (1988), 'Obstetric ultrasound
in Scotland' p.21, Fig. 1.
230
according to the position ofthe fetus, the size ofthe mother, the amount of
amniotic fluid and many other variables.[Emphasis added]67
Thus the nature of the technology demanded certain skills, competencies and responsibilities
which were not usually delegated to non-medical personnel. The interactive nature of
ultrasound scanning, the immediacy of interpretation and diagnosis, the number ofvariables
which could affect the image and the skills required to construct them, all coalesced to make
obstetric ultrasound more akin to a form of 'art' requiring craft skill than an easily quantified
and regulated 'science'. Admittedly, the transformations in technical design had made
ultrasound a much simpler technology to operate. However, human skills and competencies had
not been completely replaced by technical means. If RCOG were to advocate the practice of
ultrasound screening, they would also have to accept the new division of labour. Thus for the
RCOG working party, control over the training ofpersonnel, and therefore the authority to
designate who did and did not possess these skills, was a solution to the disharmony of
matching obstetric ultrasound to the new division of labour associated with routine ultrasound:
We believe that this [Diploma in Obstetric Ultrasound] is important in
view of the high level of interpretative and communicative skills
demanded ofthose practising obstetric ultrasound, the high degree of
personal responsibility involved and the critical nature of the decisions
which are often based on the ultrasound findings.68
The proposed Diploma in Obstetric Ultrasound was to be the joint responsibility of RCOG and
the Royal College of Radiologists. It was to be held by all staff (medical and non-medical) who
undertook unsupervised scanning; it would be a specialised form of training dealing only with
obstetric scanning; and it would be assessed on the basis ofa practical examination. While this
may appear to be a fairly sensible and straightforward recommendation, it was in fact highly
contentious - the issue of appropriate training had been debated since the late 1970s.
67 RCOG, (1984), 'Report ofthe RCOG working party' p.18.
68 ibid., p.19.
231
Throughout the history of obstetric ultrasound's use in clinical practice, the training of new
operators had been a largely ad hoc affair. More significantly, it had also been a form of
training based largely on practical experience. Although a variety of training courses were
offered by various centres (including those in Glasgow and in Dundee) which included lectures
on the physics of ultrasound and so on, these were neither universally attended, nor a necessary
condition ofemployment. Instead, new personnel were taught in-house, by staff who were
already familiar with the technology. This was also related directly to the types of skill required
in ultrasound imaging. A phrase commonly used by ultrasound operators is 'getting your eye in'
- learning to be able to read ultrasound images and translate the two dimensional images into
three dimensional structures. Furthermore, a certain degree of spatial awareness and manual
dexterity was demanded in order to position the probe in the place best suited to achieve the
desired image. These therefore were skills that could not be taught by formal lectures, but
'picked up' through practical experience. Even then, as Professor Charles Whitfield notes, not
all trainees were able to develop these abilities:
The funny thing about ultrasound - some bright people who are good
clinicians, well trained, just cannot use it. It's like people who want to fly,
they find out that some just can't manage and it's to do with three-
dimensional co-ordination. I can remember one girl in Manchester who
was a bright Australian, and she was absolutely hopeless at it. She said, 'I
know I'm competent,' (we both did), 'but I just cannot do this.' And she
said, 'some people come in here and can do it in a day or so, and I've been
trying for months.' And she just hadn't got the perception.69
Thus ultrasound was viewed as a skilled activity which could only be taught through practice.
Neveliheless, the differences in the way ultrasound was operated from location to location
meant that purely in-house forms of practical training posed significant problems for the
construction of universal standards oftraining. Such methods were also problematic in terms of
'transferable skills' for those who wished to relocate to other centres. For these reasons, and
given the increasing use oflower grade staff, the 'problem' of training was a matter of
considerable debate.
69 Interview with Professor Charles Whitfield, 24/08/99.
232
The issue was first raised in the BMUS Bulletin towards the end of 1979 and continued to be a
regular feature of debate in the journal throughout the 1980s. Initially, however, the debate was
generic to medical ultrasound as a whole - and thus not explicitly confined to obstetric
applications. However, in 1984 when the issue of the safety of ultrasound in pregnancy was
raised, and in particular the appropriateness of routine obstetric scans (given the questions
which were being raised over the procedure's possible health risks), the debate over training
requirements became more directly focused on ultrasound in obstetrics. Thus, although the
debate was in essence generic to the practice of diagnostic ultrasound as a whole, the safety
aspects of its application in obstetrics led to a greater focus on training and regulation within
that specialist area of medicine.
The first professional body to institute a formal qualification for diagnostic ultrasound was the
College of Radiographers. As early as 1977, the College introduced a postgraduate Diploma in
Medical Ultrasound (the DMU) which was based on a training period of 12-18 months, final
examinations and viva voce, as well as 30 continuous assessment reports. Furthermore, the
qualification covered scanning techniques and normal/abnormal appearances in all the major
medical specialties, as well as areas such as equipment checks, safety levels, and so on.70
Neve11heless, at its initial inception, the qualification was not a necessary prerequisite for
radiographers wishing to undertake medical ultrasound and many radiographers continued to
practice without the DMU. Indeed, Scotland did not have a single centre that administered the
DMU until the late 1980s and thus very few Scottish-based radiographers attained this
qualification. Those who did tended to be those seeking posts outwith Scotland where, although
the DMU was not a pre-requisite for practice, those without this qualification were at a
considerable disadvantage.71
70 An outline ofthe course requirements for the DMU can be found in BMUS, (1986), Bulletin a/the BMUS, No.
41, May, pp. 6-7.
71 Scottish Home and Health Department/Scottish Health Service Planning Council, (1988), 'Obstetric ultrasound
in Scotland, p.48.
233
Part ofthe reason why the DMU was so poorly valued in Scotland relates to the fact that
ultrasound services were not concentrated in x-ray departments in the same way they were in
England, as noted above. The greater centralisation of ultrasound services in England meant
that the DMU qualification for radiographers was more appropriate for their purposes. Unlike
their colleagues in Scotland, radiographers who conducted obstetric ultrasound scans in
England would also provide ultrasound examinations for a number of other specialties. Thus a
form of training that offered a general knowledge and competence in medical ultrasound, rather
than a specialist training in its obstetric applications, was a more suitable qualification.
Despite the introduction ofthe DMU, therefore, the training ofthe vast majority ofultrasound
operators in Scotland (clinicians, technical staff and personnel from other backgrounds)
remained in-house and ad hoc. However, by the end ofthe 1970s, the changing nature of
ultrasound diagnosis, and the increasingly specialist nature of examinations, raised concerns
that such training procedures were inadequate. In November 1979, an editorial in the BMUS
Bulletin outlined some suggestions relating to the future training of ultrasound operators.72 In
particular they advocated two main developments: the creation of recognised training centres
which would cater for the training ofpersonnel in all specialties and at all levels; and the
creation of a British Institute for Ultrasound in Medicine which would be responsible for the
accreditation of courses and the registration of members on the basis offormal training and
continual assessment. Thus, initially at least, BMUS favoured a collective form of training,
presided over by a body independent of all the main professional groups. With these
recommendations in mind, the BMUS committee set up a meeting with the various professional
colleges and societies associated with the delivery of diagnostic ultrasound to discuss the issue.
The outcome ofthis meeting was reported in the Bulletin in October of 1980, with the
following conclusions:
In general the representatives ofthe various colleges and societies were
against the idea of setting up a joint institute to look after education in
ultrasonics and certification of personnel. It was concluded that each group
72 BMUS, (1979), Bulletin a/the BMUS, No. 25, November, p.l.
234
e.g. radiologists, physicists, obstetricians, radiographers, etc., would have
to look after their own training.73
For the historian of medicine, it is tempting to explain this resistance to the idea ofunified and
centralised training centres by reference to professional interests and inter-specialty power
dynamics. Thus it could be argued that vested interests in maintaining control over the
technology within one's own field led to an unwillingness to allow members of a particular
professional body to be trained by other personnel. Nevertheless, it is clear that the outcome of
this debate was again fashioned more by the nature of ultrasound imaging than by professional
interests. Standardised training ofthis magnitude was simply impractical for a technology
characterised by heterogeneous forms of practice. Within obstetrics, for example, the sheer
number of diagnoses of increasing complexity that could be made, not to mention other skilled
practices such as invasive procedures guided by ultrasound, entailed that the expertise required
of senior clinicians within the field was highly specialised. A common qualification held by all
operators in all specialties was clearly felt to be inappropriate.
Thus the call made by the RCOO working group in 1986 for a standardised obstetric ultrasound
diploma must be viewed from within the context ofthis debate. The recommendation they
made was much more limited in nature, but was nevertheless a call for a standardised level of
basic training for all staff performing unsupervised sessions. In their opinion, the DMU was too
generalised to demonstrate adequate competency in obstetric ultrasound and thus even those
radiographers who possessed this qualification were not necessarily competent to conduct
unsupervised sessions.
Once again, however, the call for a standardised basic training in obstetric ultrasound did not
become a reality and the various professional bodies continued to regulate the ultrasound
training oftheir own members. Knowledge and practical experience of ultrasound (including
200 hours of supervised scanning of which at least 75 hours had to be in obstetrics) was
included amongst the requirements for the Fellowship of the Royal College of Radiologists,
73 BMUS, (1980), Bulletin a/the BMUS, No. 28, October, p.l.
235
while the Royal College of Obstetrics and Gynaecology required knowledge of obstetric
uitrasound (assessed via examination) from all those seeking Membership.74 Furthermore, in
1986 a Joint Ultrasound Group (chaired by Professor Charles Whitfield) was established
between the two Royal Colleges, whose specific remit was to harmonise the training of
obstetric ultrasound for radiologists and obstetricians, a substantial part of which was to be
based on practical experience.75 The proposed course was aimed at clinicians planning to take a
leading role in the delivery of obstetric ultrasound services, and therefore was not proposed as a
form of 'basic' training - this continued to be dealt with separately.
Implicit in the resistance to a universal form oftraining for all ultrasound operators, was the
idea of a hierarchy of examination 'types' and thus a hierarchy of skills and competencies
required. In other words, not all ultrasound procedures were considered suitable to be carried
out by lower-grade staff such as midwives and radiographers. Thus a notion of different levels
of expertise and therefore non-uniform skill requirements, was threaded through the debates
over training. However, while this perspective was commonly held amongst those who worked
with the technology, defining where the boundaries were drawn between different types of
practice was problematic. First of all, the way in which certain procedures were viewed was
historically contingent. In both the Queen Mother's and Aberdeen Maternity Hospital, for
example, ultrasound-guided amniocenteses were initially only done by clinical staff. Towards
the end of the 1980s, however, midwives were also performing these tests.76 The reasons for the
'downgrading' ofthis practice were numerous. The increasing quality of ultrasound images and
improved ergonomics of probes provide a technical reason. As Charles Whitfield commented:
Technological developments, which continue to be frequent, not only
enhance the performance and range of application of equipment but often
74 Scottish Home and Health Department/Scottish Health Service Planning Council, (1988), 'Obstetric ultrasound
in Scotland, p.47.
75 Royal Colleges of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists and of Radiologists, (1987), 'Report of the joint ultrasound
group' London, RCOG; Whitfield, C.R., (1992), 'Training in ultrasound in obstetrics and gynaecology' in
Chervanek, F., Isaacson, G. & Campbell, S., Ultrasound in obstetrics and gyl1aeco!ogy, Little, Brown & Co.,
Boston, Mass., (offPrint).
76 Interview with Dr Margaret McNay, (05111197); interview with Dr Patricia Smith, (01/04/98); interview with Dr
Norman Smith, (01104/98); interview with Sister Grace Porter, (01104/98).
236
simplify their operation and make training easier so that some of the
guidelines and expected skills will change.77
In addition, the proliferation of more complex procedures (such as intrauterine fetal surgery and
chorionic villus sampling) and the increasing numbers of amniocenteses requested - particularly
in light of AFP screening programmes - exerted an organisational pressure for the delegation of
this task in order to free clinicians for more difficult procedures.
A further complicating factor was locational diversity. First of all, practices considered to be
complicated procedures to be performed only by clinicians in one centre, might not be regarded
as such in another. The difference between district general hospitals and large tertiary centres,
in terms of size, staffing levels and patient characteristics, came into play here. So too did the
quality of equipment being used. Furthermore, the site-specific mix ofpersonnel in each centre
also made the implementation of a universal hierarchy difficult to achieve. In Perth and
Dundee, for example, a strict 'clinicians only' rule for certain procedures would effectively
entail the replacement of Sandy Christie as head ofthe scanning team.
In Scotland, this diversity of practice was clearly evident to the NMCC's Ad Hoc Ultrasound
Group when they examined the delivery of obstetric ultrasound. More importantly, it shaped the
recommendations they made for harmonisation of services across the country. In their repoli,
they acknowledged the emergence of a three-tier pattern of expertise and function. However, in
attempting to specify the contours of this pattern in the form of a recommended hierarchy they
were careful to note that it should encompass 'flexibility in accordance with local practices'.78
The structure proposed by the Ad Hoc Group was thus a reflection of current 'best practice'
(see Appendix 1). This was to provide the template for the delivery of obstetric ultrasound in
the context of universal screening and the use of non-clinical staff. The first level of scanning
related to the types of practices associated at the time with screening. All observations (except
77 Whitfield, C.R., (1992), 'Training for ultrasound' p.3.
78 Scottish Home and Health Department/Scottish Health Service Planning Council, (1988), 'Obstetric ultrasound
in Scotland, p.39.
237
rletermining gestational age and fetal presentation) were asterisked to indicate that abnormal
findings were to be referred for further scanning.
However, the way in which such a follow-up referral system was organised differed from
location to location. In centres where a clinician was always on hand to re-scan patients,
abnormal findings were always diagnosed on the same day. This was easier to achieve in those
centres (such as the Queen Mother's, Aberdeen and Kirkcaldy) where ultrasound was located
within obstetrics departments and where obstetricians were trained to use the technology. In
centres where clinical support was provided by radiologists, suspected anomalies would be
given another appointment to see an obstetric consultant who would report the ultrasonic
findings. In the Western Isles, where much of the screening took place off-site in peripheral
clinics and GP surgeries, anomalous findings were referred either to the Lewis Hospital or to
the Queen Mother's in Glasgow, depending on the nature ofthe problem.
However, in light of the literature on the potential for 'bonding' to take place between pregnant
woman and unborn child, ultrasound operators were actively encouraged to explain the images
to pregnant women, to point out features in the scan.79
This, coupled with the immediacy of
real-time imaging and its interactive nature, entailed that the silence ofthe operator and the very
fact that an additional scan was to be performed by another person, alerted pregnant women
(and their families, if present) to the presence of a problem. A number of strategies were
employed in an attempt not to worry patients and to ease the pressure on non-medical staff
confronted by worried questions. In Kirkcaldy, for example, the scan would first be conducted
with the screen turned aside from the pregnant woman. If normal the scan would be repeated to
show pregnant women the 'baby'. If a problem were detected, excuses such as poor resolution
('I can't get a good picture') would sometimes be used. In the Queen Mother's, patients would
be told at the outset that the operator would 'take a while' to make measurements etc. before
explaining the image - thus providing a reason for operator silence at the outset. Nevertheless,
79 Both the RCOG working party report and the NMCC Ad Hoc Group report noted that pregnant women should
be encouraged to observe the scan images. The issue of bonding is discussed in greater depth in the coda to this
thesis.
238
the inability of operators performing Levell scans to communicate problems to pregnant
women was an uncomfortable situation.
At the second level (which included amniocentesis and detailed anomaly scans) a greater level
ofexpertise was required for the more detailed analysis ofthe ultrasound image and formal
diagnosis ofspecific conditions. Aside from obstetricians and radiologists, the only other staff
appropriate to carry out such examinations were those radiographers and midwives who had a
major role in the training of staff. From their discussion ofthis system, it is clear that the Group
felt the most appropriate personnel for this level were obstetricians. They emphasised the
continuity of care that could be provided by this group when decisions regarding future medical
management were made. Furthermore, the few lower-grade staff who operated scans at this
level were again confined by their inability to formally diagnose - this had to be done either by
the obstetric team in charge ofthe patient's overall care, or by the clinician in overall charge of
the service (ifhe/she was an obstetrician). The Group advocated that scans at Levelland 2
should be available in all hospitals, while peripheral clinics and larger GP obstetric units should
be equipped to perform only Level 1 scans. The more specialised and interventionist forms of
ultrasound were confined to Level 3 and were considered appropriate only for regional referral
centres in the four main cities (Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Dundee).
Unlike the attempts made by RCOG to standardise training requirements, the Ad Hoc Group's
guidelines for standardising the organisation of ultrasound services were relatively successful.
As late as 1998, for example, the 'Three Levels of Obstetric Ultrasound' table was reproduced
in an overview document on obstetric ultrasound provision in the Grampian region.8o
Furthermore, the language of 'Levels' entered into common parlance, and (when interviewed
for this project, for example) actors would commonly refer to Levels 1, 2 and 3 when
discussing what their job entailed. Thus the Ad Hoc Group's recommendations were successful
in providing a set of parameters for the organisation of practice and a common language
80 Anon, (1998), 'Obstetric ultrasound service in Grampian: working document to establish the past, present and
future provision of obstetric ultrasound for Grampian' Aberdeen (no publisher given).
239
through which activities in different locations, performed by different actors, could be
compared and discussed.
Nevertheless, it is evident that this form of standardisation was successful precisely because it
was vague enough to allow heterogeneity in practice to continue. Unlike the clearly defined
division of labour within x-ray imaging, for example, the division of labour described here
reflected diversity. For example, the fact that some radiographers and midwives were included
as appropriate staff at Level 2 can only be viewed as an acceptance of current practice in some
areas such as Glasgow. Furthermore, the training required for each level was defined in
practical experience terms rather than in terms of formal qualifications, such as the DMU as a
pre-requisite for radiographers. They also advised health service planners to provide resources
for screening strategies of2.5 scans per pregnancy: i.e. between two and three scans per patient.
In this way, they did not directly advocate any ofthe systems in current practice - instead
providing ample scope for continuing flexibility.
Thus, rather than set down specific and tightly defined prescriptions for the staffing and
delivery of obstetric ultrasound, the Ad Hoc Group attempted to provide an over-arching
description of current practice. This was not, therefore, an attempt to impose standardisation in
the usual sense ofthe term, but an act ofharmonisation which attempted to encompass the
heterogeneity and diversity of ultrasound practices in Scotland. In this way, a variety oflocal
circumstances shaped site-specific local arrangements, which in turn shaped national policy.
Heterogeneity thus emerged as an endemic feature of the routine use of ultrasound in obstetrics.
Conclusions
During the 1980s obstetric ultrasound emerged as a regular feature of antenatal provision in
Scotland. Not only did it become an indispensable tool, used in the diagnosis of an increasing
number of conditions and pathologies in pregnancy; it was also reconceptualised as a screening
technology to search for hidden pathology when no clinical signs were identified. In addition,
the routine performance of ultrasonically determined fetal measurements became the
cornerstone ofthe medical management of pregnancy. These measurements were used to
240
determine gestational age which in turn became the basis upon which a number of
organisational and clinical decisions were made (from when a pregnant woman next needed to
attend the antenatal clinic to decisions regarding induction of labour). Thus obstetric ultrasound
in the 1980s performed a prominent role in the medical management of pregnancy and the
overall delivery of obstetric medicine.
Furthermore, a significantly high proportion of staff, drawn from a number of professional
backgrounds, were involved in the delivery of the technology, particularly in terms of its use as
a universal screening device. However, the performance of routine ultrasound involved two
separate kinds of competency. The first was the ability to take accurate measurements from the
fetus (head circumference, BPD, crown-rump-Iength etc) and to perform a series of checks
(location of placenta, number of gestations, fetal heart movements, and so on). In addition,
however, ultrasound was also used for the direct visualisation of pathology - intrauterine death,
placental abruption, fetal abnormality. While the former types of competency could more easily
be delegated to non-medical staff, this was not the case with the latter. Thus although the
development of routine ultrasound was achieved via the increased use of non-clinically trained
staff to perform the majority of examinations, this was not an easy division of labour to
manage. A number of strategies evolved to deal with diagnoses ofpathology encountered by
non-clinical staff performing routine scans.
Nevertheless, while it might be tempting to conclude that ultrasound had thus become a
stabilised technology and a standard procedure, the enduring heterogeneity that existed in the
technology argues against this. On a site-by-site basis, key differences remained in the delivery
of ultrasound, including the training of operating personnel, their professional backgrounds, the
timing of routine examinations and the overall shape of ultrasound services.
For this reason, the concepts of 'standard procedure' and 'stability' in terms ofthe technology's
provision across Scotland can only be applied at a very superficial level. It was ubiquitous; it
was regularly used; and there were some basic similarities in its delively. Nevertheless, enough
diversity remained to justifY the conclusion that it was never a completely standardised or
241
stabilised technology. Thus, rather than apply these terms in a generalised manner, they are
perhaps more appropriately used to describe site-specific developments. That is to say, the
1980s witnessed the increasing stability of local practices as the role and organisation of
ultrasound became more clearly defined in each location.
Nevertheless, that is not to suggest that even at the local level, major transformations did not
occur. The reconfiguration of ultrasound's delivery to encompass its new role as a screening
technology was a significant development during this period and was accommodated in
different ways in each location. When placed into practice, each location pursued a routine
policy suited to its particular circumstances and thus imposed its own form of stability on the
new arrangements.
Furthermore, it can be argued that the reconceptualisation of obstetric ultrasound as a screening
technology represents an instance where the use of a relatively 'stabilised' artifact did not
represent the end ofthe development ofthe technology. The underlying technical configuration
of real-time ultrasound was not challenged during this period, and yet the technology underwent
a period of significant reorganisation. The debates surrounding the development of ultrasound
screening were as prominent as those which surrounded the introduction of RT in the 1970s but
were of a different nature in that they related more specifically to the social organisation of the
technology than to its technical composition. Thus the relative stability of an artifactual design
should never be considered as the end stage of a technology's development. Furthermore, the
persistence of heterogeneity in the face of a number of attempts to create greater standardisation
of obstetric ultrasound, suggests that technological debates and controversies are not always
'closed' through the formation of consensus. Instead, the debates over the delivery of routine
ultrasound and the training of staff suggest that diversity can be embraced in technological
decision-making.
In conclusion, therefore, the term 'routine ultrasound' is something of a misnomer. Routine
practices were developed at the local level, but never universally standardised. This in turn was
a direct consequence of the way in which local factors shaped the nature of ultrasound
242
technology and thus ofthe diversity oflocal arrangements. In comparative terms, obstetric
ultrasound remained a heterogeneous practice, within which a variety of routine procedures
(which had emerged from, and been integrated with, local conditions) co-existed.
243
Coda
Scan stories: pregnant women's experiences with
obstetric ultrasound
What swims up on screen resembles
The satellite weather-map before
The news. ". Zoom
To another part of the sky, to a moon
Half-buried in cloud. An orbit
Already guessed at. It shows us
Its dark side, the face that no one sees.
I look at it hard while Dr. F. makes stills,
Clicking around it with the mouse.
And now, time for the news.
As usual, it's bad.
l
Introduction
The aim ofthis coda is to present a collection of individual accounts ofwomen's experiences of
obstetric ultrasound during pregnancy. While these accounts do not contribute to the
elaboration ofthe themes outlined in this thesis, they nevertheless provide an alternative view
of the technology and its application within obstetrics. Furthermore, a wealth of material is
already available, which addresses the impact this technology has had on the experience of
pregnancy.2 Most of these studies and commentaries have emerged from feminist discourses
and are centred around themes such as the medicalisation ofthe pregnant body, alienation in the
experience of technologically-managed pregnancy and the changing power dynamics between
pregnant woman, medical profession and fetus. It is not the intention here, however, to engage
I Crowe A., (1994), 'Forecast', in Kennedy AL., McGonigal J. & Bateman M. (eds.), A Sort ofHot Scotland (New
Writing Scotland), Association of Scottish Literary Studies, Aberdeen.
2 DUden B. (1993), Disembodying women: perspectives on pregnancy and the unborn, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge Mass. & London; Greig R., (1995), Pregnancy in a high-tech age - paradoxes ofchoice, New Yark
University Press, New Yark; Oakley, A. (I984), The captured womb: a histo/y ofthe medical care ofpregnant
women, Basil Blackwell, London; Petchesky, R. (1987), 'Fetal images: the power of visual culture and the politics
of reproduction', Feminist Studies, Vol 2, No.2, pp. 263-93; Rapp R. (2000), Testing women, testing the fetus: the
social impact ofamniocentesis in America, Routledge, New York; idem., (1997), 'Real-time fetus: the role of the
sonogram in the age of monitored reproduction' in Downey, G.L. & Dumit, J., (eds.), Cyborgs and citadels,
School of American Research Press, Santa Fe, New Mexico; Saetnan, AR., (forthcoming), 'Thirteen women's
narratives of pregnancy, ultrasound and self in Saetnan, A.R., Oudshoorn, N. & Kiejczyk, M., (eds.), Localizing
and globalizing reproductive technologies, Ohio State University Press, Ohio.
245
with the various theoretical debates and perspectives associated with this literature: these lie
beyond the remit ofthis thesis and will be addressed elsewhere.3
Instead, women's recollections oftheir ultrasound experiences will be presented as an adjunct
to the main thesis. However, in order to provide a framework within which women's
experiences and stories can be compared, the theme of inclusion/exclusion in the experience of
obstetric ultrasound will be explored. How involved did women feel in the scanning process,
and what factors affected their experiences? What will be emphasised, is that women's
accounts of the scanning process have to be viewed with reference to their wider experiences of
pregnancy, their interpretations ofthe purpose oftheir own ultrasonic examinations and their
perceptions ofthe images produced. There are, in other words, no straightforward, mono-causal
explanations that can account for the variety of individual women's accounts.
In all thirteen women were interviewed about their ultrasound experiences. The interviews
themselves were informal and open-ended, lasting anywhere between half an hour to two hours.
In order to maintain confidentiality, the women have been given pseudonyms while the names
of obstetricians, ultrasound operators and hospitals have been excised from the accounts.4
It
should also be noted that these accounts should not be directly related to the hospitals used as
case studies in this thesis: they have been drawn from women attending a variety of centres
across Scotland.
A few topic areas were used as a prompt and guide but, as much as possible, the women were
encouraged to tell their stories themselves. As an 'outsider' and non-medical researcher, it was
inappropriate to use medical records to trace possible interviewees. Thus the women in the
study were contacted through a variety of formal and informal means: through advertisements
3 Nicholson, D., (forthcoming), 'Interacting with images: experiences of obstetric ultrasound during pregnancy'
(unpublished work-in-progress).
4 The only exception to this is Betty's story. Given that this account dates from very early in the history ofthe
technology (1960) and that this, in itself, was an important feature of Betty's experience, it was considered
appropriate to identify the hospital and personnel. This does not effect Betty's anonymity and allows a more
detailed account ofultrasound in this experimental stage from the patient perspective.
246
in local newspapers, suggestions from colleagues and friends, etc. There is therefore no means
of assessing the representativeness ofthis 'sample' - of generalising from their stories to make
claims regarding 'all' women who received ultrasound.
However, for the purposes ofthis examination, 'representativeness' is not an important issue.5
These women speak for themselves about their interactions with technology - about the way in
which they perceived ultrasound, its effect on their pregnancy and how they felt about it. In
other words, in the same way in which ultrasound as a technology developed in a subtly
different way in each centre in this study as a result ofparticular, local circumstances, each
woman's experience of ultrasound was born from the interactions between her, the equipment,
the location, the operator and other events or circumstances in her life. Therefore, they do not,
and cannot, speak for all women - however one might choose to subdivide, categorise or
quantify that population. Nevertheless, the fact that some similarities in experience can be
detected, both amongst the group ofwomen in this study and through comparison with women
interviewed elsewhere6
, points to possible areas where generalisations can be suggested.
What will be presented in this coda, therefore, is the variety of factors that were pulled into
individual women's interactions with ultrasound. These factors did not mediate between
woman and technology - they were encompassed in that relationship, part and parcel oftheir
experience. Thus for each woman ultrasound 'meant' something different. However, given their
assigned role as patient (and female patient, in particular) this form of 'interpretative
flexibility'? did not lead to technical manipulation or development. In the UK, as in other
countries8
, the voices of pregnant women have not been prominent in debates over the use of
5 More comprehensive studies, drawing on larger and more standardised selections of interviewees have been
carried out elsewhere. For a comprehensive bibliography of such studies see Garcia, J., Bricker, L., Henderson, J.,
Martin, M., Mugford, M., Nielson, J., Roberts, T., (2002), 'Women's views ofpregnancy ultrasound: a systematic
review' Birth, Vol. 29, No.4, pp. 225-250.
6 Garcia, 1. et aI, (2002), 'Women's views ofpregnancy ultrasound'; Greig R., (1995), Pregnancy in a high-tech
age; Rapp R. (2000), Testing women, testing the fetus; idem., (1997), 'Real-time fetus'; Saetnan, A.R.
(forthcoming), 'Thirteen women's narratives ofpregnancy, ultrasound and self.
7 Pinch, TJ. & Bijker, W.E. (1984), 'The social construction of facts and artifacts; or how the sociology of science
and the sociology oftechnology might benefit each other' Social Studies ofScience, Vol. 14, pp. 399-441.
8 See, for example, Saetnan, A.R. (forthcoming), 'Thirteen women's narratives of pregnancy, ultrasound and self.
247
medical interventions such as ultrasound. The only UK lobby group which professes to 'speak
for' them is AIMS (the Association for Improvements in Maternity Services).9 This group,
however, does not carry much weight and although it professes to provide a focal point for
women's dissatisfaction with their care during pregnancy, it has not gained a wide membership
or affiliation even from women with such experiences.
Nevertheless, although the interpretations of ultrasound formed by the women interviewed were
not powerful enough to shape the technology, in some respects elements oftheir accounts can
be interpreted as 'accommodation strategies'. Depending on their individual circumstances,
women came to terms with this technology in different ways by translating ultrasound into their
general experiences of pregnancy, childbirth, risk, pathology and antenatal supervision. Their
perceptions ofthe technology, therefore, were the result of a myriad of factors and
circumstances.
The women and their pregnancies
The thirteen women interviewed received ultrasound examinations throughout a period
spanning over thirty years, the earliest dating from 1960 and the most recent from 1992. Their
experiences thus cover most ofthe technology's development from innovative procedure to
routine screening device. In total, they were scanned during twenty-five pregnancies. 10
Seven women were scanned during one pregnancy, four during two pregnancies, one over four
and one over six. Interestingly, nine ofthe thirteen women received scans during at least one
pregnancy for non-routine purposes. In other words, these women were examined ultrasonically
for specific clinical diagnostic purposes ranging from problems associated with their obstetric
history to potential problems identified from their current pregnancy. Betty, for example, was
scanned in 1960 after three previous miscarriages. Janet had previously given birth to a child
9 More information on AIMS can be found at www.aims.org.uk. They also produce a monthly journal, one volume
ofwhich is dedicated to their views on ultrasound (AIMS, (1992), 'Ultrasound? Unsound' AIMSjoul'nal, Vol. 5,
No.2).
10 Women who were given ultrasound scans during more than one pregnancy often had different experiences from
one pregnancy to the next. Therefore, to avoid confusion, when reporting their narratives, the year ofthe scan to
which they are referring is noted (unless they are providing a more general account), along with their 'name'.
248
with neural tube defects in the early 1970s, who died of meningitis at 4 months of age. In 1968
Catherine was examined - presumably because at 41 she was considered 'high risk'. Other
women were scanned because they were suspected of carrying twins, had high or low blood
pressure, suspected placenta praevia, or large or small for dates gestations. Two women were
also offered 'reassurance' scans when they themselves felt there was something wrong with the
pregnancy, and a further two women received ultrasound as part of amniocentesis testing. Thus,
although these women represent only a very small proportion ofthe number of women exposed
to ultrasound during this period, their experiences cover a wide range of the uses ofthe
technology throughout its history.
Betty's is the earliest account - dating from 1960, during the technology's innovation period in
Glasgow. Having had three previous miscarriages, Betty was referred to Professor Donald by
her general practitioner. As soon as she found out she was pregnant again (at about eight
weeks) she was admitted to the obstetric ward in the Western Infirmary where she remained as
an in-patient until she was about seven months pregnant. Thus, in some senses Betty's
ultrasound scan had little to do with the management ofher pregnancy - in the 1960s bed rest
was by far the most common 'treatment' for repeated miscarriage. II However, the almost five
months which she spent in hospital was associated with loneliness. Hospital policy did not
allow children to visit the ward, and so Betty was separated from her one-year-old son
throughout this time.
Betty was one of a group of four women sharing a ward for long term patients - all of who were
asked to participate in the testing ofthe new ultrasound machine. In terms of her introduction to
the technology, therefore, Betty's experience was rather unusual. She was not being introduced
to a machine which, although new to her, was a standard part ofthe obstetrician's day, but was
being asked to participate in the trial of an innovation. Given this rather unique situation, it is
perhaps unsurprising to learn that Betty was asked for permission for ultrasound to be used; was
11 Indeed, according to Oakley, McPherson and Roberts, bed rest remained the most popular method of managing
women with an 'incompetent cervix' (which was Betty's eventual diagnosis) until at least the 1980s. Oakley, A.,
McPherson, A. & Roberts H., (1990), Miscarriage, Penguin Books, London, pp. 133-136.
249
taken down to see the machine the day before her scan; and was shown the resultant Polaroid
pictures by an enthusiastic Ian Donald the day after.
Furthermore, Donald explained both the purpose ofthe scan and the procedure itselfto Betty.
This, as will be demonstrated when the experiences of other women are considered, is probably
the most unusual aspect ofBetty's scan:
I must have been in about four months when he asked me. He explained
the technique, that it wouldn't harm my baby, because, I mean, in those
days you didn't know whether it harmed your baby or not. He said it'd
be a great achievement if he could make anything out of it once the scan
was done. He took me into this room and showed me the machine.12
Thus Betty's scan, occurring as it did when the technology was still very much its infancy, was
characterised by a great deal of consideration for her position as a 'guinea pig'. Donald appears
to have made an effort to ensure that she did not feel frightened of, or worried about, the
procedure.
From this it could be argued that this early patient encounter with ultrasound was characterised
by a relatively large degree of information and explanation of the process. However, the
importance ofthis should not be overstated. The information was still communicated from
within the context of a consultant obstetrician telling his patient that consenting to this
examination was in her interest and was his medical advice. Mediated by that context,
therefore, it is fair to say that she was only given as much information as was deemed
appropriate by Donald. For example, Betty's recollections of how Donald explained the
procedure are that:
12 Interview with Betty, December 1997.
250
He said it took, it would take pictures of the baby in the womb and
everything to tell him if everything was okay, or not okay... 'It'll crawl
over your tummy', he said. 13
For other women, however, very little information was offered either in relation to why they
were being given scans or what the examination involved. Catherine, for example, was scanned
in 1968. Pregnant for the first time at the age of 41 she presumes she was considered a high-risk
case as a result of her age. However, she was scanned for the first time after being admitted for
a week with high blood pressure, and was examined with ultrasound twice more shortly before
labour:
I thought everyone had them but one ofthe nurses said to me, 'we have
to wait until Dr X comes, he's the only one who can operate it'. So then
I realised it was something very new. They didn't explain what it was
for. There was no communication with us at all to say why 1was being
chosen. 1never thought to ask the purpose of it - I thought everyone got
this treatment. 14
Many ofthe other women also report similar experiences - of not being entirely sure why they
were being scanned or what was being looked for. Many, like Catherine, made their own
conjectures: '1 think probably my age was the reason' (Catherine, 1968); '1 was late and 1think
they thought the placenta was coming before the baby' (Molly, 1979); '1 take it it was to do
with the urine sample they were collecting' (Frieda, 1982); 'I assumed it was just part ofthe
routine' (Sharon, 1989). It is interesting to note that these similar experiences occurred despite
the women being of different ages when they were scanned (22-41) and at different periods in
the history ofthis technology (1968 - 1989). Thus it would appear that a persistent feature of at
least some women's experiences is a lack of information or explanation ofthe purpose ofthe
scan. This therefore would appear to supp0l1 to some extent the claims of feminist critics such
13 Interview with Betty, December 1997.
14 Interview with Catherine, July 1998.
251
as Oakley and DUden that technologies such as ultrasound can contribute to a feeling of
alienation and powerlessness. IS
However, this should not be viewed either as an inherent feature of ultrasound or as a feature
peculiar to the technology. Lack of communication between doctors and patients more widely
has been a persistent feature ofthe critique of medical practice. 16 In their testimonies, the
women mentioned a number of procedures carried out during pregnancy and labour which they
did not know the purpose of (Frieda, for example, did not know what the numerous urine
samples were for). Furthermore, one ofthe women expressed a large degree of dissatisfaction
with the amount of information she received throughout her pregnancy, except during one of
her ultrasound scans. In Roberta's view, her status as a single parent and her social class
position led her to be treated unfairly:
there was a woman in the next bed who was a social worker, or her
husband was, and she held quite a good position in her job and the way
they approached and spoke to them, it was like they had more time. If
she, or her husband, wanted to know something they sat down and
explained things. My mum was forever running out the ward chasing
somebody to find out information. 17
In addition, only two ofthe women had some idea of how ultrasound actually worked. One was
a practising midwife when she became pregnant and had acquired her knowledge of the
technology through her training. The second had a complicated history of neural tube defects
and became something of an amateur expert on the technology over her six pregnancies.
Nevertheless, none ofthe thirteen women (except for Betty) had the technology explained to
them before the scan - none were given any details as to how the images were created using
15 Oakley, A., (1984), The captured womb; DUden, (1993), Disembodying women.
16 For studies of doctor/patient communication out with obstetrics see, for example, Stoeckle, J.D., (ed.), (1987),
Encounters behveen patients and doctors: an anthology, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. For a study of clinical
encounters during pregnancy see Oakley, A. & Graham, H., (1981), 'Competing ideologies of reproduction' in
Roberts, H., (ed.), Women, health and reproduction, Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., London.
17 Interview with Roberta, March 1998.
252
sound waves. In the absence ofsuch information, the women were left to make sense of the
technology themselves:
To me it looked like a microphone, which it is because it's picking up
the heartbeat, isn't it?18 (Lucy, 1979)
I wasn't worried about side effects or anything because I realised there
was nothing going inside me, nothing was coming into contact with the
baby or anything.19 (Molly, 1979)
He hadn't told me anything. He never said it was painless, just that it
would determine whether there was one or two [fetuses]?O (Kelly,
1976)
However, it is interesting to consider that even for women who had never heard of ultrasound
before, very few ofthem actually worried about what was going to happen or what a scan might
involve. Nevertheless, this must be viewed in the context oftheir more general experiences of
pregnancy. For many, the fear that something might be wrong entailed that they were concerned
about the results of the scan - rather than the procedure itself:
In a way I suppose we could be taken advantage of. I got to the stage
where they could do what they liked as long as everything was all
right?1 (Catherine, 1968)
Another common theme was faith in the medical profession and the general authority with
which they were viewed. For all these reasons, the women implicitly consented to a whole
battery oftests and procedures without question and these themes run throughout many of their
narratives:
18 Interview with Lucy, July 1996.
19 Interview with Molly, July 1996.
20 Interview with Kelly, March 1998.
21 Interview with Catherine, July 1998.
253
You know in they days your doctor was always right - if he advised it
was good for you, you would do it. Your faith in your doctor was
complete. You just, you put your faith in this man. He was a great man.
I always trusted him...I mean, you know, ifhe'd have said 'I'm going to
cut you open' that'd have been all right. I would have done handstands
for him.22
(Betty, 1960)
They didn't tell me anything, I just presumed they were having a look to
know what was happening, but they never told me anything. And I'm
not the kind of person who would have asked, I mean, I would now but
not when you're younger, you don't know what's happening. I had total
trust in them, though. I think it's because you're so ignorant. You just
do what you're told. I mean, you trust them because they're the
experts.23
(Molly, 1979)
The scan
Women's accounts ofthe actual scan itself were varied, although there were a few shared
experiences that cropped up in their narratives. The scanner itself was rarely something clearly
remembered by the women. To them, it was simply another piece of medical equipment being
used to check everything was okay. Some women, who were scanned in the 1960s and early
1970s, recall the large gantry over the bed (' ...it was a big machine where something attached
to a fi'ame came over you'). Women scanned with later, real-time equipment often likened it to
a computer (,there was just one lady sitting at like a massive computer with the screen'). Given
the relatively little information they were given about what the process involved, it may seem
rather surprising that they were not more curious about what the machine was. However, in
terms oftheir recollection ofthe procedure it is possible to perceive a divide between visual and
'felt' knowledge. All ofthe women have clear recollections of the physical sensations
associated with the scan, the contact gel applied to their abdomens and particularly the
discomfort of maintaining a full bladder:
You would go in the morning with a full bladder and would change into
a gown. I think latterly they just asked you to pull your underwear down
22 Interview with Betty, December 1997.
23 Interview with Molly, July 1996.
254
or asked you to take your pants off because the gel is quite messy.24
(Janet)
I had to drink lots of water and even when you got there you had to
drink more and couldn't go to the toilet. It was uncomfortable and there
was people going in for their scan and getting sent back out again
because their bladder wasn't full enough?S (Kelly, 1986)
There was like a little reception, and I got my card and was sent round
to where the little waiting area was and sat there, because of course,
you've to have a full bladder which is most uncomfortable. I think I sat
there for about 15 minutes and had to drink more water before I went in.
I couldn't wait and had to go to the 100, and so I had to drink more
water.26 (Lucy, 1979)
That was a nightmare, and not just that you have to drink it - you have
to hold on to it for a long, long time, before they say you can go to the
100. All you can think about is going to the 100 and I'm sure I had to
give them a mid-stream sample and all you want to do is get rid of it
all!27 (Sharon, 1989)
It could be argued that as pregnancy is something which women experience rather than observe,
they become more attuned to physical sensations than visual ones in their encounters with
medical care. However, given the number of diagnostic tests to which they are exposed, from
internal examinations to needles for extracting blood, it is perhaps unsurprising that physical
sensation is more memorable than things which they see. Pain and discomfort are arguably
more immediate in their effects on the body.
Perhaps the most unusual scan story is Betty's. Although Ian Donald had gone to great lengths
to introduce her to his (at that stage) still experimental machine, there was one significant detail
which he missed out:
24 Interview with Janet, July 1998.
25 Interview with Kelly, March 1998.
26 Interview with Lucy, July 1996.
27 Interview with Sharon, March 1998.
255
When I did go in eventually, there was only one big light and it was like
a theatre table that I lay on and the nurse smeared stuff all over my
stomach - not these wee bits and pieces they do now. And then it just,
'click', like it was crawling all over clicking and then the lights went up
and we were surrounded by all these students. They'd been very quiet -
I was mortified! And if he had told me, it wouldn't have bothered me,
but Ijust didn't know they'd be there?8 (Betty, 1960)
While dimming the lights may have been a gesture towards keeping Betty's nervousness to a
minimum, it would probably have been technically necessary so that the others in the room
could see the picture developing on the screen. However, given the effort Donald appears to
have made to provide her with as much information as possible, it is perhaps slightly unusual
that he did not ask her permission to use her scan for demonstration purposes.
For all ofthe other women, however, the scan was a more private affair. The majority had only
one or two medical staff in the room (iftwo were present, one was always a clinician). Only
three women were invited to bring along another family member during the scan - Jane brought
her husband, Kelly brought her daughter and Roberta, a single parent, was accompanied by her
mother.
The theme of inclusion/exclusion can again be identified in the women's recollections ofthe
scan process. The more involved they felt with the procedure, the more detailed their memories.
Irene, for example, was not spoken to during the scan and was not directly informed of what the
examination was for:
I remember lying down, but I don't remember paying any attention to it
because that wasn't on my mind, you know, it was just the outcome. I
think I must have been apprehensive about the whole thing, but I
28 Interview with Betty, December 1997.
256
possibly didn't know that that machine was connected with me.29
(Irene, 1972)
For others, such as Lucy and Catherine, their lack of involvement in the scanning process is
clearly linked to the actions ofthe scan operator(s):
I can't remember them saying anything very much at all, to be honest. I
felt kind of isolated now that I think about it, sort of anonymous as well.
I mean I wasn't scared, but you're a wee bit apprehensive when you're
getting something that you've never had before. I was never really given
the opportunity to ask questions, I mean, no one really invited me to do
that. They spoke to each other and they never included me in anything
they said to each other. They were speaking about what they were
writing down, but they were never forthcoming.30 (Lucy, 1979)
He never spoke. He just came into the room and the stuff was rubbed on
your belly and that was it. He didn't speak until the very last time when
I asked how things were, because I was a bit suspicious because they
had taken me [for a scan] for a third time, and I didn't know ifit was
routine or not. He said, 'you have a fine, healthy baby', and I thanked
him very much.3l
(Catherine, 1968)
Clearly, non-communication with pregnant women during ultrasound scans can contribute very
directly to feelings of alienation and detachment. There is evidence to suggest that as the
technology has changed, so too has the degree of involvement felt by pregnant women
undergoing the procedure. Most ofthe women interviewed whose scans were done in the later
1980s felt much happier about the amount of information they were given during the scan:
Never having had one before you hadn't a clue what was going on and
they really did explain what they were doing and pointed things OUt.32
(Sharon, 1989)
29 Interview with Irene, March 1998.
30 Interview with Lucy, July 1996.
31 Interview with Catherine, July 1998.
32 Interview with Sharon, March 1998.
257
She spoke all the time. She said everything seems fine, length and this
sort ofthing, and dates.33
(Kelly, 1986)
Furthermore, many hospitals, such as Aberdeen Maternity began providing information leaflets
and posters in their waiting areas, detailing what the scan procedure involved and what could be
detected (see Appendix 2). There has also been a proliferation in the 1980s and '90s of
'maternity magazines', almost all of which include articles on ultrasound scanning.
Nevertheless, much ofthis can be more directly associated with the increasing prominence of
the fetus as a cultural product, in addition to a changing attitude towards patient involvement in
obstetric tests. As Baker, Yoels and Clair note in their study of doctor-patient encounters, the
enduring centrality ofthe bio-medical model (or the clinical gaze) in medicine undercuts the
rhetorical claim that the late 20th
century saw an increasingly patient-centred form of medical
practice.34
Medical students are taught to cut through patient narratives and to elicit only the
biomedical facts and thus patient communication is regarding as something of a 'one-way
street'. Thus it is perhaps unsurprising that what communication does exist is very much
limited by medical parameters.
It is also important to note that pregnancy can be a worrying time for women for a variety of
reasons. Coming to terms with bodily and hormonal changes, the ways in which they
accommodate their new status with their existing social roles, etc. can all contribute to
heightened anxiety during this time. In particular, however, it is not uncommon for first time
mother to be very apprehensive about the birth itself and, in this context, comments made by
care givers (while appearing innocuous to them) can increase this anxiety:
I feel nurses shouldn't say anything unless they're definite about what
they're talking about, but the [operator] says, 'Oh my God, that's a big
one, a ten pounder!'. I remember her words because I thought, 'Oh
God!', I mean you don't know what's ahead ofyou when it's your first
33 Interview with Kelly, March 1998.
34 Baker, P.S., Yoels, W.C.& Clair, J.M., (1996), 'Emotional expression during medical encounters: social dis-ease
and the medical gaze' in James V. & Gabe J., (eds), Health and the sociology ofemotions, Sociology of Health
and Illness Monograph Series, Blackwell Publishers/Editorial Board, Oxford, pp. 173-200.
258
and I was really worried because I was huge. I mean, I was worried
sick.35
(Molly, 1979)
However, there are other factors more directly associated with the technology of ultrasound
which can account for the degree of silence some women experience. For many of the women
in this study, it was a non-clinical member of staff (radiographer or midwife) who operated the
equipment. As has been noted in the previous chapter, the greater use of such staff brought with
it organisational problems associated with their inability to make diagnoses. Sharon, for
example, experienced the classic scenario where the radiographer informed her that she
couldn't get a clear picture and that she had to fetch another member of staff:
That scan was horrific because they all shut up, they didn't say anything
and there was silence.36
(Sharon, 1992)
Thus it could be argued that saying very little to the patient until the scan is over can be used as
a strategy to avoid awkward situations which arise when something is detected on the scan
which the operator is unauthorised to communicate. Thus the particularities of this technology
and its organisation must be taken into account.
Interacting with images
Although actors such as Ian Donald had long recognised that ultrasound could be used to
promote a sense of bonding between mother and unborn child (see Chapter 3), it became a
common theme in the medical literature from the early 1980s onwards.3
? The most important
aspect of this was the image itself: viewing the scan pictures would enable women to become
acquainted with the fetus more directly than with other antenatal procedures. A couple of the
35 Interview with Molly, July 1996.
36 Interview with Sharon, March 1998.
37 For example, Fletcher, J.e. & Evans, M.L., (1983), 'Maternal bonding in early fetal ultrasound examinations'
New Englandjournal o/medicine, Vol. 308, No.7, pp. 392-3; Reading, A.E., Cox, D.N., Sledmere, e.M. &
Campbell, S., (1984), 'Psychological changes over the course of pregnancy: a study of attitudes towards the
fetus/neonate' Health psychology, Vol. 3, No.3, pp. 211-21.
259
women interviewed in this study had just such an experience:
I was able to see everything on this scan - right down to the fact that
there was no doubt it was a boy. It was nice and made it a bit more
personal. There was this baby that was my little boy and it all seemed so
real.38 (Roberta, 1983)
It was really special in that you can see the baby moving and everything
looks all right at a glance. You can see two legs, two arms and
everything seems okay from that point ofview. It's exciting - seeing
your baby for the first time. If you find out you're pregnant and (aside
from people who maybe have morning sickness which confirms
pregnancy for a lot of people) - for people who don't have that and
don't feel any different and you think, 'well, is there something there? I
don't feel any different'. It does in a way confirm it because you can see
something is there.39
(Jane, 1989)
Even for these two women, however, the story is not quite that straightforward. Jane as a
practising midwife was also aware ofthe possible problems that could be identified by
ultrasound and part of the way in which she viewed the scan image was acquired through her
training:
My husband would look at it and think, 'Oh, there's a baby', but
myself, I would think, 'That bit's there and that bit's in the right place'.
I think anybody would ifthey've got the right training behind them.40
(Jane, 1989)
Thus, Jane's perception and interpretation ofthe scan image was an amalgamation of two
different ways of viewing. On the one hand, she perceived the images as an expectant mother
and on the other as a medical professional. This highlights the importance of the gaze and the
fact that ultrasound images do not necessarily 'speak for themselves'.
38 Interview with Roberta, March 1998.
39 Interview with Jane, March 1998.
40 ibid
260
Roberta also adds an interesting point to her account when she reports that:
I think my bond actually happened with my scan. I know it sounds silly,
but it did.41
(Roberta, 1983)
This echoes a story which is recounted by one ofthe women interviewed by Robyn Gregg:
I can remember saying to [my husband] on the ride [home], that I was
having a strange sensation ofhaving left the baby back in the office,
you know, that the baby was there in the screen... What we saw
couldn't possibly be right there with us, in the front seat, in my womb.
It just, I mean, I still didn't feel I could make the connection... so I felt I
left it there for safe keeping.42
This type of response to ultrasound imaging could be thought of as a form of 'fetish'. That is to
say, it is the ultrasound image itself, rather than the fetus in utero which is imbued with
meaning. The technology of ultrasound has imposed its existence in the image, as the means
whereby the invisible fetus is rendered visible, the ultrasound image itself is the object ofthe
gaze. Thus it is the representation ofthe fetus, rather than the fetus itself which is associated
with emotional meaning. In a sense, this is the opposite ofthe irony which Roland Barthes
explores in Camera Lucida. 43 Here Barthes discusses the way in which the photograph itself is
rendered invisible because of the central importance ofthe referent. In this case, however, the
only visual knowledge which the pregnant woman (or spectator) has of the referent is via the
technology of ultrasound and the image or representation itself therefore has greater
importance.
The majority of women, however, were not able to make even this level of connection with the
images - no matter how hard they tried. The day after being scanned with the innovative new
41 Interview with Roberta, March 1998.
42 quoted in Gregg, R., (1995), Pregnancy in a high-tech age.
43 Barthes, R., (2000), Camera Lucida, Vintage, London.
261
device in 1960, Betty was shown the resultant small Polaroid picture by an enthusiastic Ian
Donald. He was apparently very pleased with the image, but Betty was completely unable to
interpret it - even when an effort was made to point important features out to her:
It was the next day he came round with this wee print and he was all
excited and to me it just looked - it was like a black mountain with
snow going the wrong way on it. He kept saying, 'that's the head', but
there was nothing to my eye and you would never have known - you'd
have just thought it was a dud picture. But he was highly excited about
it.44
Donald's gaze, used as it was to interpreting both ultrasonic images of different tissues and,
crucially, other medical representations ofwomen's bodies in different states ofdisease and
pregnancy, possessed a very specialised set of skills with which to guide himselfthrough the
image. Betty, however, did not possess these skills and could not connect with what was being
shown to her: she had no point of reference.
On the other hand, she was not simply a casual observer. The picture she was shown was of her
unborn baby and might also hold the key to enable her to carry it to term. Therefore, it could be
suggested that Betty's perspective was largely emotional and psychological but this perspective
was not adequate to give Betty the framework with which to view and interpret the image. That
is not to say, however, that she did not try:
I thought, 'that's my baby', but I couldn't see it, ifyou know what I
mean. I was trying to study it, I even held it upside down.45
Other women shared Betty's inability to interpret the images in any coherent way - one
describing it as a 'black blob', while others noted seeing things move but being unable to make
44 Interview with Betty, December 1997.
45 ibid.
262
out what they were:
I can't say I understood anything I saw because it was just all things
moving. It didn't look like a baby at all to me - I just couldn't see it at
all. [The operator] was saying, 'look at the head', and I could see this
sort of line, but it didn't look like a head to me. I was hopeless...46
(Lucy, 1979)
These accounts are significant in terms ofthe notion of 'bonding'. In order to be able to attach
any tangible meaning to an image, it is first necessary to have some kind of perspective on the
image: to interpret it, one has first to be able to see it. Furthermore, it is too trite to explain this
inability to interpret the image as the result of inferior equipment or early machine design.
Firstly, these accounts span almost 20 years ofthe technology's development from 1960 to
1979. Some were produced from static scanners and some from real-time equipment.
Furthermore, the images were certainly clear enough for the operators to not only discern the
areas of interest, but also to make clinical diagnoses from them. Instead, what appears to be
lacking here is a coherent perspective: a semiotics ofultrasound with which to interpret the
signs displayed in the image.
Women's experiences of ultrasound images, like the ones above, demonstrate the pivotal role
which interpretation from a very particular perspective plays in the use ofultrasound for
diagnostic purposes. The ultrasonic images did not speak for themselves in any coherent
language which was freely recognisable by any observer - they needed to be looked at from a
particular standpoint.
However, that is not to say that the ability to perceive the images was a purely social
phenomenon, dependant entirely on the formation ofa 'gaze' with which to view them. A
number of material factors also come into play. For example, whether or not the fetus could be
viewed in its entirety in a single frame could effect the ability to discern anatomical details by
46 Interview with Lucy, July 1996.
263
their position in relation to one another (head, torso, legs, arms etc). Again, however, there are
technological dimensions to this. While static scanners could visualise the whole abdominal
area in one image, real-time equipment had a much smaller 'window' (see chapter 3). Thus, for
women scanned using RT equipment, late third trimester scans would not be able to display the
fetus in one frame: in this case, therefore, even the size ofthe fetus (i.e. the date ofthe scan)
can have an effect. Furthermore, the position of the fetus in relation to the probe also effects the
technology's ability to 'render' a recognisable image. Here too, machine design plays a role as,
with RT, the vantage point from which the fetus is viewed can be changed by changing the
position of the probe.
Nevertheless, the very fact that ultrasound 'sees with sound' rather than light entails from the
outset that what is produced is significantly different from what could be viewed by the naked
eye. The fact that it simultaneously displays both the internal and external features ofthe fetus
through the construction of a cross-sectional image means that it renders something which
cannot be known visually in precisely the same form by any other means nor by the naked eye,
either inside or outside the womb. Thus, rather than expressing surprise at many women's
inability to 'see' their baby, it should perhaps be more surprising that so many can.
For other women, however, their obstetric lives can become so interwoven with the technology
of ultrasound that they do become adept at viewing scan images from a clinical perspective. For
Janet, the death of her first child (who was born with hydrocephalus (water on the brain) and
spina bifida) meant that obstetric ultrasound became a regular and important feature of her
subsequent pregnancies. Her second pregnancy was terminated at seventeen weeks, after being
diagnosed with anencaphally. Although the final arbiter as to whether or not a neural tube
defect was present was an amniocentesis test, it was during the scan beforehand that the
anomaly was detected.47
Her next pregnancy was terminated after anencephally and spina bifida
were diagnosed. Again these pathologies were detected by ultrasound, and confirmed by
47 At this time, 1976, amniocenteses were not carried out under direct ultrasound guidance. Ultrasound was used to
detect the position of the placenta and fetus and marks were made on the abdomen to indicate the best point for the
insertion of the needle (see Chapter 3).
264
amniocentesis - this time at fourteen weeks. After a fourth pregnancy which ended in
miscarriage, Janet went on to have two children when she took part in a clinical trial offolic
acid as a prevention for this condition. Her previous experiences, however, made her quite
skilled at viewing the scan images - particularly the fetus's spinal column:
[The obstetrician] could show me that the spine hadn't developed.
Towards the end, I could pick things up for myself. I got quite good at
. h b h ' 48
spottmg t e verte rae on t e spme.
Thus, Janet's gaze was much closer to the 'clinical gaze' of the medical profession than the
other women interviewed. The detection of anomaly prior to birth was the most important
aspect of ultrasound scanning for her:
For myself, [ultrasound] was crucial in my decision making. I would
not have considered another pregnancy without it. I couldn't have gone
nine months without knowing. Even if the vitamin research had come
in, without ultrasound I don't know if! would have taken part. Nine
months is a big slice out ofyour life. To go through the trauma of nine
months not knowing at the end of it ifyou're going to have a healthy
baby...49
Again therefore, it was Janet's own personal circumstances - her obstetric history and her desire
to have a healthy baby - that caused her to interact with the technology and the images in the
way she did. Hers was an emotional gaze but of a different sort. She did not want any more
children to suffer the same fate that her first daughter did and thus the clinical diagnosis was
paramount. Nevertheless, as Janet's story clearly demonstrates, these circumstances were not
the wider context into which ultrasound scanning was placed. It was the interaction between the
two - her ultimate intentions, what she wanted to know about the pregnancy and what the
technology could tell her - which mutually constructed both her experiences of pregnancy, the
48 Interview with Janet, July 1998.
49 ibid.
265
decisions she made and her perceptions of ultrasound imaging.
However, some ofthe women interviewed never saw the ultrasound image at all - either
because they were not encouraged to look or because they did not want to. Irene and Frieda, for
example, who were given ultrasound examinations in 1971 and 1982 respectively, were not
asked if they would like to see the screen either during the procedure or after the examination
was finished. Neither woman, however, had a particular desire to see it. Before Irene received
her scan she had glimpsed her file that stated that the scan was to exclude any 'fetal
abnormalities' and so she was more concerned about the outcome than the procedure itself.
Frieda was an in-patient at the time after several urine tests had highlighted some potential
problem (she doesn't know what this was and went on to have a normal delivery). Although she
thinks now that the scan was something offered to everyone, at the time she didn't know the
purpose of it and, again, was worried that something was wrong. Catherine's story is similar:
You were aware there was a picture of the baby, but they didn't say,
'look round and see it'. Actually, one of the nurses asked ifI wanted to
look but I said, 'Not really'. I just asked ifthe baby was all right. I
wasn't all that interested - your mind is focussed on only one thing.50
(Catherine, 1968)
Thus it is not simply the changing nature of ultrasound technology and its delivery or
presentation which effects women's ability to interact with ultrasound images - the general
context ofthe scan and why it is being performed can also effect this. The fear that something
might be wrong with the pregnancy can lead to something of a detachment from the whole
process. A scan which is routine in nature and where there is a general expectancy on the pat1
of the pregnant woman that everything is probably okay can produce a different outlook
towards the process and the images produced than a scan in which concern has been voiced.
This, however, is not the case for all women. Helen, for example, was offered a 'reassurance
50 Interview with Catherine, July 1998.
266
scan' after she felt that something was wrong with her pregnancy:
Just about the 28 week stage, when I was due to go up anyway to see
the consultant, I realised that something was wrong because I was aware
almost of a falling sensation, as ifthe baby had dropped in the way they
do drop prior to birth. [...] I had had this sensation and also, although I
didn't feel there was anything terribly wrong with me, my whole tummy
area didn't feel right and I was aware that looking at the shape of the
bump, it was no longer round, it was more flattened.51 (Helen, 1988)
Unlike the three women mentioned previously, however, viewing the scan images themselves
was an important factor in reassuring her (at least initially) that the pregnancy was not in
danger. After the fetus's heart rate and her own blood pressure were monitored, Helen was still
not completely convinced and so she was booked in for a scan appointment 10 days later:
She did the scan and specifically pointed the placenta out to me and the
fetus and everything was in place. I felt fine after that and celebrated
with a nice lunch and felt I was just being silly.52
As it turned out, however, Helen was not 'being silly'. Four days later she began to
haemorrhage and was rushed to hospital with placenta praevia: the scan operator had made a
grave misdiagnosis from the ultrasound:
It was only when I got to theatre and the [doctor] questioned me about
my medical history to that point, and especially about my care to that
stage, that I realised there had been something wrong with the scan
because he was aghast that I had had a scan only a few days previously
and that the placenta had been shown to me to be in place, and
everything okay. That I should have been reassured at that stage, given
my internal state and given the fact the baby would definitely not have
been sustained at that point, in his opinion, he was really furious. I'll
never forget that obstetrician's face - he was so incredulous. He was
amazed that three days previously she [the operator] had been able to
51 Interview with Helen, October 1999.
52 ibid.
267
look at a screen and not detect a case of placenta praevia, especially as I
was there for careful monitoring, not just as a standard outpatient. The
obstetrician said it was impossible for the baby to have been attached,
given the state of distress and the extent ofthe haemorrhaging.53
Helen's tale ended tragically. She was given an emergency caesarean and her baby son was
delivered 10 weeks premature. After surviving in hospital for over 15 weeks, he died suddenly.
The death was recorded as Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS or cot death).
In terms of ultrasound, what is most significant about Helen's case is that the technology was
used to override her own subjective knowledge that something was wrong, with tragic results.
Her own feelings about her pregnancy were silenced by the apparently more objective and
reliable evidence ofthe scan. This case, therefore, lends support to Ann Oakley's claim that
obstetric technologies such as ultrasound are used as a replacement for women's subjective
knowledge, rather than an addition.54 It also highlights the important way in which visual
information is valued more highly than 'experienced' knowledge.55
Furthermore, the importance of the 'gaze' is also dramatically highlighted here. Despite her
symptoms and the signs she was detecting from her own body, Helen's fears were lessened by
the ultrasound scan. She herself did not have the clinical knowledge or experience of ultrasound
to 'identifY' the placenta on the screen. Nevertheless, she believed she had seen the attached
placenta, when the scan operator pointed to an area of the screen and told her that was where it
was. Thus although Helen did not 'see' the baby or the placenta, she believed that she had
because that was the interpretation she was given. It was not the visual image which lessened
her fear but the verbal interpretation of it: a sign of a sign.
A few of the women interviewed were given pictures to take home with them. This practice
was introduced at different times and in different ways from location to location, but only
53 ibid.
54 Oakley, A., (1984), The captured womb.
55 DUden B., (1993), Disembodying women.
268
became a technical capability with the introduction of real-time scanners.56 Many of the women
who were not offered this keepsake, expressed regret that their friends and relatives had such
mementoes when they did not. For those who did, the scan image often became the first picture
in the baby album, although for others, tragically, it was to be the only representation of their
lost babies. This can cause mixed emotions with regard to the scan. Sharon, for example,
miscarried her twin pregnancy at twenty-seven weeks, a few days after having a chorionic villus
sampling (CVS) test. She was referred for this test after an ultrasound scan during which
concerns were raised that one of the fetuses might have spina bifida. Although CVS is known
to carry a statistically higher risk of miscarriage it is, ofcourse, impossible to directly relate the
test to Sharon's miscarriage. She was, however, never given the results ofthis test and thus
does not know for certain whether either, or both, of her twins were actually affected by the
condition. Initially the ultrasound scan was considered normal, but later the clinician began to
suspect that an anomaly might be present:
The first scan I had done, the way one oftheir legs was [positioned]
they said, 'this one is going to be a footballer'. And this was all great,
with this picture that I got, and then it turned out they began to wonder
ifthere was maybe something wrong. I thought, 'it's ironic that this is
the big laugh in the hospital, with this scan, about the football player' ...
The legs never moved and they were always in this one position, and
that was when they started to pick up on it.57
Thus for Sharon, the scan picture is bitter-sweet: while it is one of the few pictures she has of
the babies she lost (she also has photographs taken after they were born), it also reminds her of
the circumstances surrounding their loss:
I think you need [a picture] and the scan photo I have turned out to be
totally ironic, but I'm still glad I've got it. I have [a photo] in a frame in
my room, but I would put it in the living room and, I know it wouldn't
56 With static scanners, the still polaroid image was the only record which could be kept of the scan and was thus
valuable for its clinical utility and retained by the hospital.
57 Interview with Sharon, March 1998.
269
bother them, but I feel for other people [family and visitors to her
home] it's not the done thing.58
In this case, the scan picture is one ofthe few tangible mementoes which Sharon has of her
twins. For this reason, perhaps, it has more symbolic and emotional meaning than the scan stills
kept by other women. Furthermore, the scan refers to the only time in which Sharon 'knew' her
babies, its significance has not been diminished by other photographs and pictures representing
different stages in the development of her babies into childhood and beyond. In a sense
therefore, the images (both photographs and scan) have been reified: having lost the babies
there is no living child or adult referent for them.
Conclusions
The ultrasound experiences presented here suggest that while there is scope to suggest that
women can be marginalised during scans, this is neither an inherent feature ofthe technology,
nor peculiar to it. Nevertheless, for some of these women, lack of communication and
information before, during and after the procedure, contributed to a feeling of exclusion and, in
some cases, disinterest. For others, however, it was the anxiety about what the scan might
reveal which led to such feelings: in other words, the very fact that the technology represented
potential pathology led to feelings of disengagement. Yet other women, however, felt both
informed about, and included in, the procedure.
Thus it is clear that the differences in women's experiences of ultrasound need to be examined
as more than simply an historical phenomenon. While it is undoubtedly true that the delivery of
antenatal care more generally has undergone major changes from the 1960s to the 1990s, this
alone cannot account for the variety in these women's accounts. Technological changes (both of
equipment and organisation) as well as the particular circumstances which women bring with
them to the scan room, also produce their experiences of being scanned. Nevertheless, the
58 ibid.
270
technology itself is not infinitely malleable. While it can be used in different ways and can be
shaped by the various elements which constitute it, the type of information which it does and
can produce itselfeffects women's experiences of it. In the above discussion of communication
during the scan, for example, even this is in some ways set by the parameters ofthe technology.
Thus the way in which the scan is presented to women while they are in the scan room is not
simply the context into which the procedure is slotted: it is an integral feature of the technology.
To explain the variety of women's experiences it is necessary to supersede the old distinctions
commonly made about the context and content oftechnology. A whole spectrum of elements
coincides during an ultrasound scan to produce the event as experienced by women.
Furthermore, in terms of women's interpretations ofthe actual scan images produced by
ultrasound, it is evident that a myriad of factors combines to construct the way the scan is
viewed. What these pregnant women saw in the scan was the emergent outcome oftheir
obstetric history, their current feelings about their pregnancy, their interactions with operating
staff, the equipment itself, the rendering ofthe images, etc. Thus it would appear to be
unfruitful to reduce these experiences to a single totalising narrative or explanation. Instead,
women's interactions with ultrasound can be viewed more realistically as an emergent
phenomenon in which the historical transformation in the technology is only one aspect.
271
Conclusions: secrets of success
272
Introduction
Contained within the preceding pages is an account of the introduction, development and
use of obstetric ultrasound in Scotland. Covering a period of more than thirty years, this
thesis traces a history of the technology from its origins in Glasgow in the late 1950s, to its
ubiquitous use across the country by the end of the 1980s. Nevertheless, this account was
not intended to portray a complete overview of technological change, or to map out
obstetric ultrasound's development across time in all locations. Rather, the intention was to
highlight the complexity and variation contained within the diffusion of this technology
through detailed and contextualised examples of technological transfer and application in
practice. Drawing on a variety of different types of source (official publications, memoirs
and oral testimony, as well as the artifacts themselves in the form of ultrasound machines
and images), this thesis presents an account of the varied and dynamic nature of
technological change in the diffusion of obstetric ultrasound.
The study began with an examination of the work of Professor Ian Donald and his co-
workers in Glasgow on the early development of The Diasonograph - the first commercially
available form of diagnostic ultrasound in Scotland. Examining this period in the history of
the technology provided a starting point from which to examine continuity and change over
time by considering the way in which a technology used in one context (industrial flaw
detectors) were adapted for use in a completely different setting. In addition, consideration
of this period was crucial to the development of one of the central themes of this thesis - the
dynamics of innovation and diffusion. The type of work undertaken by Donald and his
colleagues has traditionally been bracketed off and labelled as the 'innovation stage'. Thus
in order to challenge the use of innovation and diffusion as periodising concepts in 'stage'
models of technological change, it was necessary to consider the period traditionally
considered as the sole preserve of the former.
The fact that this technology emerged within the clinic - with early prototypes being used to
examine gynaecological patients within the hospital - perhaps made the overlap between
innovation and diffusion even more pronounced. For example, as Thomas Brown worked
on new prototypes (the bed table scanner, the automatic scanner and the Sunden machine)
earlier versions were used by Donald and the other clinicians in the team not only to
increase their knowledge of the technology's potential uses, but also as an aide to clinical
diagnosis. For example, ultrasonic investigations such as the differential diagnoses of
273
tumours, cysts and early pregnancies were carried out with increasing regularity in the
hospital. The fact that these scans were performed on the grounds of clinical diagnosis,
rather than technological experimentation, is not the form of development commonly
associated with 'innovation' but is more clearly akin to 'diffusion'. In other words, such
activities demonstrate the technology's spread into clinical practice prior to its commercial
introduction as a commodity.
Furthermore, it is evident that in some respects the diffusion of the technology preceded the
movement of actual artifacts - often regarded as one of the defining features of 'diffusion'.1
In particular, the movement of patients as referrals from other hospitals demonstrates that it
is not necessary for artifacts to disperse in order for diffusion to occur. On the other hand,
the early publications produced by the team were also significant tools associated with the
technology's diffusion. Publications such as the Lancet, but more significantly the Journal
ofObstetrics and Gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth - a favoured publication
within the specialist field who would form the key customer groups for the new technology
- provided a means of spreading knowledge of diagnostic ultrasound and its emerging
capabilities.
Thus in the 'period' which is often bracketed off and labelled 'innovation' it is evident that
both types of activities were occurring simultaneously. As new prototypes, techniques and
practices were being developed, earlier versions were being employed for clinical
diagnoses, patients were being referred to Donald, specifically for ultrasound investigation
and knowledge of the technology was being diffused by a mixture of formal and informal
means.
Nevertheless, obstetric ultrasound was, and is, a very technically sophisticated form of
technological practice. As a result of this complexity, it is not the type of artifact which can
be easily reproduced from scratch by workers in new locations and, for this reason, the
availability of ultrasound equipment was crucial in its spread to other places. In Chapter 2,
therefore, the early career ofthe Diasonograph was examined, with particular attention
I Banta, H.D., (1980), 'The diffusion of the computed tomography (CT) scanner in the United States'
Internationaljournal ofhealth services, Vo!. 10, No.2, pp. 251-69; MCKinlay, lB., (1981), 'From "promising
report" to "standard procedure": seven stages in the career of a medical innovation' Mil/bank memorialjill1d
quarterly, Vol. 59, No.3, pp. 374-411.
274
being paid to how it was introduced into new locations, how it was used and how it was
developed. Once again, however, in this characteristically diffusion-oriented 'period' it is
evident that innovation continued to be a feature of actors' interactions with the technology.
On the one hand, the introduction of a factory-supplied model into a new institution did not
signify that the technical dimensions of the equipment had been 'black boxed' and that new
actors simply learned how to use it in its existing form. Instead, actors in new locations
(such as Alexander Christie and Alexander McIntosh in Aberdeen, and Peter Aitken in
Kirkcaldy) did not simply implement the technology, but continued to 'tinker' - to modify
and adapt equipment with the intention of making it 'work' in each new location. Similarly,
actors in Glasgow, such as Ian Donald, John MacVicar, Ussama Abdulla and Stuart
Campbell continued to work in close collaboration with engineers John Fleming and Brian
Fraser to adapt the Diasonograph for new types of investigation - such as measuring fetal
bi-parietal diameter and placentography. This is not simply to argue that ultrasound was
used as both a clinical and a research tool, but more significantly, that 'research' was not
confined to exploring innovative uses for the equipment, but was also closely associated
with directly altering its technical capabilities.
Taken together, therefore, Chapters 1 and 2 demonstrate that the innovation and diffusion of
the Diasonograph were not separate stages of development or mutually exclusive processes,
but two inter-related types of activity.
In Chapter 3 the introduction of new modes of ultrasound imaging, in the form of machines
that produced moving real-time pictures, was examined. Once again, the complex origins of
these forms of ultrasound demonstrate the interconnectedness of innovation and diffusion.
The linear array design of real-time equipment was originally developed for use in other
medical specialties (particularly cardiography and ophthalmology). Its diffusion within
obstetrics, however, was facilitated by the activities of a variety of small, newly emerging
companies who developed their own machine designs targeted specifically at obstetrics and
gynaecology. On the other hand, the EMI 'spinner' emerged as an adjunct to static B-scan
machines like the Diasonograph and was largely the outcome of work on improved
transducer element design and construction. Nevertheless, it was when the various designs
and models were placed into practice that the future and shape of real-time ultrasound really
began to emerge. In an increasingly competitive marketplace, communications between
medical users and suppliers resulted in an two-way flow of information, with suppliers
275
performing equipment demonstrations and loaning machines out for assessment, while
medical users fed information back regarding problems encountered during use. While such
information flows were sometimes relatively formal (during, for example, government-
funded machine assessment trials), a large part of this was conducted informally (through
conversations at manufacturers' exhibitions, or through the liaison work of service
engineers called out to adapt equipment for new uses, or new contexts).
At the same time, the diffusion of real-time equipment demonstrates the significance of
local factors and arrangements in shaping the intentions and goals of ultrasound users.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the Western Isles, where portability emerged as the
most highly valued and significant quality of an ultrasound machine, in the context of a
remote and sparsely populated island region. However, even within more straightforward
urban areas, local arrangements had a direct bearing on what was considered desirable in a
particular machine. At Forth Park in Kirkcaldy, for example, (where the vast majority of
obstetric ultrasound was conducted by unsupervised radiographers) machines that were
simple to use, could perform the calculations necessary to estimate delivery date from
various fetal measurements, and could provide some kind of record of the scan, were more
suitable than those that (although providing better image quality) were complicated to
operate. It was thus during actual practice within specific clinical settings that the future
shape of obstetric ultrasound machines was forged.
Finally, in Chapter 4 the emergence and attempted regulation of routine ultrasound services
was explored. The proliferating use of obstetric ultrasound can be traced as an emergent
phenomenon throughout the technology's history. As the number of conditions and
pathologies which could be detected increased, and as both the number of institutions
operating the technology, and the number of individuals trained to use it, grew, obstetric
ultrasound became an increasingly familiar diagnostic tool within obstetric medicine.
Nevertheless, this gradual development was greatly exacerbated from the late 1970s
onwards - partly in response to the availability of smaller and less costly equipment
associated with the introduction of real-time. No less significant, however, was the
development of routine screening policies which dramatically increased the demand for
ultrasound equipment and the number of women exposed to the technology. In tracing the
emergence of such policies and the attempts made by professional bodies (such as the Royal
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists) and the state (at both a UK and Scottish level)
276
to standardise and regulate them, the sheer variety and heterogeneity of practice was
explored. In Chapter 4 it was argued that the same local, contextual factors which had
shaped machine choice, had also simultaneously left their mark on the way in which
ultrasound services were organised, staffed and conducted. In other words, arrangements
had developed at the local level to suit local circumstances and thus, despite the
increasingly standardised nature of the equipment used, and several attempts to standardise
its use, ultrasound technology remained a heterogeneous and varied form of medical
practice.
Overall, therefore, this thesis has attempted to demonstrate the complex and varied nature of
the diffusion of obstetric ultrasound in both its social and technical dimensions. But what
conclusions and possible generalisations might be drawn from this study of technological
change in practice? In particular, what light does this study shed on the three main research
themes outlined in the introduction to this work - the relationship between innovation and
diffusion, and between the social and technical dimensions of technology, and the influence
of local context on the diffusion of technology?
Research themes revisited
With respect to the first of these themes (the relationship between innovation and diffusion)
it is clearly unhelpful to characterise these concepts as separate processes or distinct stages
along a developmental trajectory. Nevertheless, while this has been noted by a number of
recent sociological perspectives, the preferred solution has been to abandon the terms
altogether, in favour of more general concepts such as 'development' or'dispersal,.2
Nevertheless, the complex and varied history of obstetric ultrasound's introduction and use
in Scottish hospitals suggests that perhaps such terms conceal more than they reveal. That is
to say, there is something characteristically different about the kinds of activities associated
with creating new forms of practice (through interactions with technical equipment, social
organisation or both) and employing those practices on a more general basis. For example,
2 Bijker, W.E., (1995), O/bicycles, bake!ites, and bulbs: towards a theol)) o/sociotechnical change, MIT
Press, London; Bijker, W.E., (1992), 'The social construction of fluorescent lighting, or how an artifact was
invented in its diffusion stage' in Bijker, W.E. & Law, J., (eds.), Shaping technology/building society: studies
in sociotechnical change, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass., pp?; Jordan, K. & Lynch, M., (1992), 'The sociology
of a genetic engineering technique: ritual and rationality in the performance of the "plasmid prep'" in Clarke,
A.E. & Fujimura, J.H., (eds.), The right tools/or the job: at work in twentieth centlll)) life sciences, Princeton
UP, Princeton N.J. pp. 77-114.
277
the innovative practices which developed in the Western isles (in terms of the
deconstruction and regular transportation of ultrasound equipment) did not spread to other
centres, but were nevertheless employed on a routine basis in the Isles themselves. They
also, importantly, involved a factory-produced machine, rather than some custom-built
equipment. In order to highlight that, while these developments were unique, they were
none the less highly suited to this context, a line has to be drawn between activities and
events which are 'innovative' and those involved in the spread of such practices.
Furthermore, not all actors involved in the development of ultrasound could be described
along the lines of John Law's 'heterogeneous engineers', or Thomas Hughes' 'systems
builders,.3 To identify such actors and outline their contributions, it is again necessary to
distinguish between innovation- and diffusion-centred actions. Nevertheless, the evidence
presented in this thesis demonstrates the inter-relatedness of these two types of activities,
and indeed their mutual dependence. During diffusion, interactions between people and
machines occur both more often and in new contexts. Thus the opportunity for innovation to
emerge increases as different eyes, hands, imaginations, intentions and contexts are brought
into relationships with artifacts. Overall, therefore, this thesis has portrayed technological
diffusion as a series of events and actions rich with novelty, variety and innovation which
might be difficult to conceptualise without retaining the language that enables us to
highlight comparative differences in practice.
The second major theme addressed in this thesis is the relationship between the social and
technical dimensions of technological change. Until recently, the principal way of
theorising this relationship was to choose one side of a central dualism - technological
determinism versus social determinism.4
With technological determinism, social change is
explained by technical factors, whilst the opposite account is forwarded by social
determinism - technical change is the outcome of social factors. The preceding account of
obstetric ultrasound, however, has tended to side with recent studies of science and
3 Hughes, T.P., (1987), 'The evolution of large technological systems' in Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch,
T., (eds.), The social construction oftechnological systems, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass., pp. 51-82; Law, J.,
(1987), 'Technology and heterogeneous engineering: the case of Portuguese expansion,' in Bijker, W.E.,
Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, TJ., (eds.), The social construction oftechnological systems, pp.III-34.
4 McKinlay, J.B., (1981), 'From "promising report" to "standard procedure'''; Reiser, SJ., (1978), Medicine
and the reign oftechnology, Cambridge UP, Cambridge; Pinch T. & Bijker, W., (1986), 'Science, technology
and the new sociology of technology: reply to Russell,' Socia! studies ofscience, Vol. 16, pp. 347-60; Pinch,
T. & Bijker, W., (1984), 'The social construction offacts and artifacts; or how the sociology of science and
the sociology of technology might benefit each other' Social studies ofscience, Vol. 14, pp. 399-441.
278
technology which have addressed this duality and found it wanting. The actor-network
school of Latour, Law and Callon, for example, emphasises that neither the'social' nor the
'technological' are pure and distinct objects ofanalysis.5
Thus to use one to explain the
development of the other is both unhelpful and misleading. Instead, actor-network theory
highlights the co-dependence and mutual construction of both through the interactive
relationships between people and material objects. As John Law notes, technology is a
'messy' object of analysis - there are too many hybrids here.6
In relation to obstetric
ultrasound, the technology itself was shaped by both social and material factors in each
location. The nature of the division oflabour and the dynamics of inter-professional
relationships played a significant role in the shaping of a 'working' technology, but so too
did more material factors such as local geography, the capabilities of different types of
equipment and the availability of 'clinical material' in the form of the bodies of pregnant
women. At the same time, pre-existing social arrangements and relationships were altered
by the introduction of obstetric ultrasound. Not only were a variety of medical specialties
brought into more intimate contact with one another by the technology (particularly
obstetrics, radiology, radiography and medical physics) but also new professional structures
began to emerge, along with new occupational roles such as 'ultrasonographer'.
Nevertheless, the precise nature of these new arrangements differed from location to
location and for this reason the introduction of ultrasound machines themselves does not
provide an adequate explanation. Once again, therefore, it is the intersection and interaction
between the 'social' (inter-personal and professional relationships, interested action by
individuals, etc.) and 'technical' dimensions of ultrasound which brought about site-specific
changes.
Overall, therefore, it is impossible to explain the development of obstetric ultrasound in
each location by appealing to a fixed and unchanging 'social context' or to a pre-existing
technological imperative. Just as the technical dimensions of ultrasound changed and
emerged over time, so too did the social context into which machines were placed. The
most useful way to theorise this is to appeal to Andrew Pickering's conception of 'emergent
5 Latour, B., (1992), 'Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few mundane artifacts' in Bijker,
W.E. & Law, 1., (eds.), Shaping technology/building society, pp. 225-58; Law, 1., (ed.), (1991), A sociology of
monsters: essays on power, technology and domination, Routledge, London; Law, 1. & Hassard, 1., (eds.),
(1999), Actor network theory and after, Blackwell, Oxford.
6 Law, 1., (1991), 'Introduction: monsters, machines and sociotechnical relations' in Law, 1., (ed.), A sociology
ofmonsters, pp.1-25.
279
becoming' .7
Through the interactions between people and machines (and between
institutional arrangements, biological phenomena, social geography and so on) obstetric
ultrasound emerged as a working practice. To extend Pickering's 'dance of agency'
metaphor, not only are both dancers in motion, but they perform on an ever-shifting stage.
Much of the resistance towards such explanations of technological change come from a
desire to map the origins of a technology down to a single causative factor. Accounts which
emphasise interaction, performance and heterogeneity provide neither a chicken nor an egg
in the social versus technical sense. However, if this history of ultrasound does nothing else,
it demonstrates the multi-causal and contextual nature of technological change. One
illustrative example should suffice - the development of the 'full-bladder technique' which
had such a significant impact on the obstetric applications of the technology. To explain
this, one might point to ultrasounds characteristic behaviour when it encounters a fluid
interface as the single, most significant causal factor. Or, one might choose to highlight Ian
Donald's scientific ingenuity and medical acumen in understanding what was being
displayed in the image and what had caused it to appear visible. This in tum, might produce
an explanation based on Donald's background, his social position, the influences on his life,
his experiences during the war, his training as a clinician, and so on. Or, one might choose
to lay the credit for this development on the poor woman too polite or embarrassed to ask to
be excused to the toilet before being examined. In tum the nature of doctor/patient relations
in the context of an esteemed medical institution in the 1960s might also be implicated.
Alternatively, the avenues of communication open to clinicians to share their findings and
'discoveries' - the journal articles, collegiate conferences, informal demonstrations and
exchange of ideas etc. - might be employed to explain this development. In reality,
however, the evolution of this particular technique was a result of the inter-relationship of
all of these things - it was the emergent outcome of multiple factors and the manner in
which they came into contact with one another. To isolate any single one of these and hold
it up as principally responsible for this practice is to imply that the full-bladder technique
was, at some level, predictable. This example, along with the rest of the evidence presented
in this thesis, argues otherwise.
7 Pickering, A., (1995), The mangle ofpractice: time, agency and science, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago and London, pp. 21-27.
280
The final theme addressed in the preceding pages is the significant influence which location
has on the development of technology. From the configuration of ultrasound machines to
the arrangements made for the technology's delivery, much of the diversity displayed in this
thesis has been on the basis of comparative location. Thus obstetric ultrasound did not only
change over time (i.e. historically) but it also was significantly transformed across space.
From the 'flying ultrasound service' of the Western Isles and the hybrid machine built in
Kirkcaldy, to the different mix of professional groups involved with the technology's
delivery and the nature of the examinations performed, the development of obstetric
ultrasound has taken a different form from location to location. What is significant,
however, is that each development - each change made to the technical make-up of
machines or the practice of ultrasound scanning - is comprehensible when viewed within
each local context. Here again, Pickering's use of 'accommodation' and 'resistance' provide
a useful way of conceptualising comparative change from location to location.8
While, for
example, the evolution of a 'flying ultrasound service' in Glasgow would appear somewhat
absurd, it is comprehensible in the context of the remote and scattered communities of the
Western Isles region. With geographic and demographic diversity, comes technological
diversity. Furthermore, each specific location considered in this thesis has its own
contextual history - the location and proximity of key institutions (general hospitals,
maternity hospitals, universities), transport and infrastructurallinks, institutional
arrangements and inter-professional dynamics, patient popUlations, referral arrangements,
buildings etc. Each of these emerged over time and in the process created a unique local
character. Thus the introduction of ultrasound was rarely straightforward - the flavour and
character of each location presented certain 'advantages' and 'resistances' to the
implementation of new practices and it is the way in which these were accommodated
which helped produce comparative diversity. That is not, however, to argue that local
context is stable or that a thorough understanding of local context can provide a basis for
predicting future developments. There is always more than one solution to any perceived
'problem', more than one accommodation strategy to pursue, and in many cases this may
itself involve the manipulation of local arrangements. Nevertheless, the point remains that
to truly understand the dynamics of technological change, to follow technology' in action';
we need to examine it in practice - to observe its emergence over time and in specific local
settings.
8 Pickering, A., (1995), The mangle a/practice.
281
Final conclusions: the 'secrets' ofsuccess
Obstetric ultrasound succeeded as a form of technological practice precisely because it was
adaptable. The ultrasound scanners of the late 1980s were technically, aesthetically and in
practice very different from those of the late 1950s and early 1960s. However, it is clearly
inappropriate to draw a clear and straight developmental path in machine design, or to claim
that the Diasonograph, for example, was the genetic forebear of modern ultrasound
machines by drawing some convoluted family tree. There are too many grey areas here, too
many hybrids ofquestionable parentage.
Furthermore, a technical artifact is only one facet of a technology - it is only during use, in
practice, that it can be defined as such. A successful experiment does not automatically lead
to a successful medical practice. In other words, a working useful technology is neither born
nor invented in a single historical moment of 'Eureka' but is slowly shaped by its
interactive performance in the hands of a number of actors spread out across space and
time. For this reason, the diffusion of a technology like obstetric ultrasound is a complex
phenomenon. To reduce its history to a set of predetermined parameters and causative
explanations, decided a priori to be the most significant, is to lose sight of this complexity
and heterogeneity.
Further, in tracing the career of a successful technology like obstetric ultrasound, it is
apparent that the very term 'successful' is as adaptable as the object to which it refers. The
preceding chapters provide evidence of artifacts and practices whose shelf lives were short
(such as the EMI 'spinner' and the 'twiddle technique') but does that entail that ultimately
they should be regarded from the vantage point of hindsight as unsuccessful? For example,
while the' spinner' itself may not have survived in its entire form, modern ultrasound
transducers incorporate some ofthe technical attributes associated with its development.
The rotary motion, so central to the 'spinner' design, for example, re-emerged in the late
1980s in association with trans-vaginal probes, used on an increasingly regular basis during
early pregnancy examinations. Similarly, later manufacturers also adopted the
developments made in transducer materials associated with the production of the 'spinner'.
Thus if technological change is accepted as an on-going open-ended process, which is never
completely closed or stabilised, then any impressions formed through hindsight will also be
282
historically specific. In the absence of any stable end-point of development, any re-
assessments made through hindsight will themselves be open to later reassessment.
Thus the significance of any development remains essentially unpredictable. For example,
the transformation of an industrial flaw detector into a two-dimensional imager of the
human body had more widespread significance than the carry-case developed to transport
Jack Crichton's portable scanner. The fact remains however, that as events unfolded, and
prior to them doing so, this was impossible to predict. Further, while the work done by the
Glasgow group to bring their medical imaging machine to fruition was crucial, so too was
Crichton's carry-case in the context of the ultrasound system he operated in the Western
Isles. In its proper context, this was as significant a development in the construction of a
working practice as the evolution of two-dimensional imaging.
Similarly, the introduction of real-time scanners demonstrated that the design features
which most appealed to ultrasound users was also inherently unpredictable. It was not
necessarily the new imaging and display format which was attractive and, indeed, in many
cases these scanners were adopted despite the view that the images were of poorer quality
than previous forms of the technology. Instead, a whole range of other features from
relative cost; on-screen display facilities; portability; ease of use; and hand-held probe
design emerged as the most significant features of these new machines. Once again, because
these preferences and interpretations emerged from practices imbedded in local contexts,
their unpredictability was the result of their variability. For every difference in practice,
from one location to another, there was the potential for the technology to be used, viewed
and perceived differently.
If the conclusion to this thesis is that there are no solitary pre-existing, identifiable,
causative forces which determine the successful diffusion of an innovation, then what
generalisations can be made about technological change? If the historian or sociologist of
technology cannot rely on predictability, and chooses to abandon grand narratives and
accept diversity, where does this leave the theoretical study of technology and change?
Ideas, 'ways of knowing', machines and 'ways of doing' do not travel across time and space
unscathed and unchanged. In the case of ultrasound at least, the diffusion of technology to
new centres changed its very nature producing a complex and diverse picture of ultrasound
283
in practice. Nor has the process stopped - three-dimensional imaging and colour Doppler
present new technical challenges and opportunities for ultrasound users. In addition, new
techniques (such as ultrasound-guided fetal blood transfusions and fetal surgery) and new
practices (for example, the decline in some centres of universal screening strategies) are
continuously emerging and bringing even greater diversity. Almost forty years from the
commercial introduction of obstetric ultrasound, this is far from a stable technology in
terms of either artifact design or use. Thus, the final conclusion to this thesis is that it is
only by embracing such heterogeneity and diversity and by examining technologies in situ,
as an emergent phenomenon, that we can begin to understand the dynamics of technological
change and the multitude of factors which shape technology. It is only in the historically,
contextually and locationally specific career of a technology that we can discuss the secrets
of its success.
284
Appendix 1
11. TABLE 1 THREE LEVELS OF OBSTETRIC ULTRASOUND
FROM "OBSTETRIC ULTRASOUND IN SCOTLAND: REPORT OF AD HOC GROUP APPOINTED BY NMCC
SPECIALTY SUB-COMMITTEE FOR OBSTETRICS AND GYNAECOLOGY, OCTOBER 1986"
Listed below are the observations and tasks within the competence of ultrasonographers trained to the 3 levels of scanning and
having a regular commitment to obstetric ultrasound
To confirm intrauterine pregnancy'"
To confirm its viability'"
To determine: fetal number'"
gestational age
fetal presentation
To suspect abnormalities'"
e.g. fetal anomaly
molar pregnancy
pelvic tumour
polyhydramnios
To note placental site (after 16 weeks)'"
To refer for (or arrange) appropriate and/or further scanning
when any of the features marked'" are abnormal
To detect and specify early pregnancy complications
To detect and specify fetal anomalies (detailed anomaly scan)
To locate accurately the placental site
To comment on placental "texture"
To note retroplacental or subchorionic haematoma
To comment on fetal movements
To guide amniocentesis
To detect retained products of conception
To provide in-service supervision and training
To provide updating and refresher courses
To receive regional referrals
e.g. for difficult diagnosis
for specialised prenatal diagnosis
To perform fetal interventions
e.g. intrauterine transfusion
blood sampling
chorion villus sampling
perhaps fetal surgery
To provide regional training courses. including advanced course
To havc a commitment to rcsearch and development
(in coniunction wilh clinical physics)
Every obstetrician
Radiographers
Midwives
Training: e.g. weekly sessions for 2 months;
at least 30 hours supervised scanning
Obstetricians
Radiologists
Other medically qualified
Radiographers and Midwives (accepting a leading role
in training)
Training: 3 month full-time or equivalent
Obstetricians, e.g. subspecialists in fetal medicine
Training: to proficiency required
285
~
.!l
~
::::
~
:
~
ABERDEEN MATERNITY HOSPITAL
',"-f
~/t; Is scanning safe?
~
-
(j There is no evidence to suggest that ultrasound is harmful for
you or your baby.
~
-
'. t..
...f
(j
~
-
"'.f
~/t
(j
How can I get more information?
Questions about this scan can be answered when you attend for
your appointment, or by contacting the Midwife on Telephone
01224 - 840666 Monday to Friday 8.30am - 5.00pm.
If you do not want this scan please telephone the Scanning
Department Reception desk. Telephone 681818 ext.52116 and
cancel your scan appointment.
Can I have a photograph of my baby?
If you wish to have a photograph of your baby we will be pleased
to give you one. There is a donation box if you would like to give
a donation to hospital funds.
:; Aberdeen Maternity Hospital AR/GP/GS.
Sca"'''' "'c D8par.rler;t A"gust 1997
~ I~~ '9 ;A( :.:t:!,,!:,.!
"
\
'.
ABERDEEN MATERNITY HOSPITAL
Information for Parents
-'\
:e."~
he 20
(detailed)
OUR
!III"
CHOICE
~./
/ ' \....
Scanning Department August '\ 997
eek
sea
\0
00
01
ABERDEEN MATERNITY HOSPITAL
The 20 week (detailed) scan -Your Choice
This leaflet answers some questions to help you decide if you
want a detailed scan.
What is the main purpose of the 20 week scan?
The main purpose of the 20 week scan is to check if your baby's
growth and development are normal. A scan at this stage will
detect 70 per cent of babies who have serious physical abnor-
malities, for example of the brain, spine, and digestive system'.
Although most babies are born perfectly healthy and well, by
choosing to have the detailed scan, there is a small chance of
worrying information being given to you about your baby. If you
do not wish to be in this situation, then you should choose not to
have this scan.
How long does it take?
A detailed scan takes approximately 20 minutes. The pictures
may not be very clear if you are overweight or if the baby is lying
in an awkward position. Some mothers are asked to wait or
come back on another day by which time the baby's position
should have changed.
Does a normal scan result mean the baby is healthy?
No, a normal scan result does not guarantee a healthy baby
because scan pictures can not detect every abnormality.
Page ~
'.Smlth NC., Hau C. 1996 The detection of fetal abnormality 1989-1994.
..,.'.0..".L
ABERDEEN MATERNITY HOSPITAL (~~~)
'/, .....\
I.-f. Why does scanning not detect all abnormalities?
~
.;...
:; -Some problems will not show up with ultrasound. An example
of this is Down's syndrome,
-Some abnormalities may be missed because they are difficult
to detect. Examples of these are defects of the heart or cleft lip.
-Scanning will not detect some abnormalities until much later in
pregnancy. This includes some brain abnormalities
.'>f What happens if an abnormality is found?
~
":U
-. Each year the pictures which we get using ultrasound be-
come clearer. We see the baby in more detail than we did 5
years ago. This means we can see small variations in a
baby's development which are usually not serious, and do
not affect your baby's health. In this situation. you may be
asked to return for further scans.
If a serious problem is seen a senior doctor will talk to you
about the abnormality and discuss your care with you. De-
pending on the type of abnormality seen you may need to
choose if you want to have more scans or a test such as
amniocentesis. Sometimes a meeting with the paediatrician
[the doctor who looks after babies and children] is arranged.
to discuss the care of your baby after he or she is born.
On the very rare occasion that a life threatening problem is
found, you are given time and support from the scanning
staff to talk about the options open to you.
Doge ~
t-
oo
N
Bibliography
Interview and archival material
Interviews
Kirkcaldy
Interview with Dr Peter Aitken, former consultant radiologist, 22/02/99.
Interview with Mrs Enid Barker, radiographer and ultrasound user, July 1996.
Interview with Dr Ellis Barnett, former consultant radiologist, 27/08/99.
Interview with Dr David Bickle, general practitioner, 24/07/98.
Interview with Dr Alexander Christie, medical physicist and ultrasound expert, 10/12/97.
Interview with Dr Jack Crichton, former consultant obstetrician/gynaecologist, 09/02/98.
Interview with Dr Michael Hill, consultant obstetrician/gynaecologist, 15/7/96.
Interview with Dr Louise Hodgson, general practioner, December 1998.
Interview with Dr Valerie Farr, paediatrician and ultrasound expert, 10/05/98.
Interview with Mr John Fleming, engineer and ultrasound pioneer, September 1998.
Interview with Dr Ian Jack, general practitioner, 09/12/98.
Interview with Mrs Susan Leftbridge, midwife and ultrasound user, 01/04/98.
Interview with Professor John Mallard, former medical physicist, 28/3/00.
Interview with Dr Alexander McIntosh, consultant obstetrician/gynaecologist, 18/08/99.
Interview with Mrs Margaret McKee, former secretary to Prof. Ian Donald, March 1998.
Interview with Dr Margaret McNay, former consultant obstetrician/gynaecologist, 05/11/97.
Interview with Sister Grace Porter, midwife and ultrasound user, 01/04/98.
Telephone interview with Dr Raich, consultant radiologist, December 1998.
Interview with Dr Andrew Ratchford, general practitioner, 22/07/98.
Interview with Dr Norman Smith, consultant obstetrician/gynaecologist, 01/04/98.
Interview with Dr Patricia Smith, consultant obstetrician/gynaecologist, 01/04/98.
Interview with Julie Smith, midwife and ultrasound user, 01/04/98.
Telephone interview with Professor Allan Templeton, consultant obstetrician/gynaecologist,
05/03/99.
Interview with Professor Charles Whitfield, consultant obstetrician/gynaecologist, 24/08/99.
Interview with Mrs Eleanor Young, radiographer and ultrasound user, July 1996.
288
Former obstetric patients
Interview with Adele, March 1998.
Interview with Betty, December 1997.
Interview with Catherine, July 1998.
Interview with Fiona, March 1998.
Interview with Helen, 21110/99.
Interview with Irene, March 1998.
Interview with Jane, March 1998.
Interview with Janet, July 1998.
Interview with Kelly, March 1998.
Interview with Lucy, July 1996.
Interview with Molly, July 1996.
Interview with Roberta, March 1998.
Interview with Sharon, March 1998.
Interview transcripts
Mr. Tom Brown, interviewed by Ian Spencer, (courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer and Fleming).
Mr. Wallace Ban, interviewed by Ian Spencer, (courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer and
Fleming).
Dr Alexander Christie, interviewed by Ian Spencer and John Fleming, (courtesy of
Nicolson, Spencer and Fleming).
Professor Sir Malcolm McNaughton, interviewed by Ian Spencer, courtesy ofNicolson,
Spencer and Fleming.
Mrs Winnie Childs, interviewed by Ian Spencer, (courtesy ofNicolson, Spencer and
Fleming).
289
Archival sources
British Medical Ultrasound Society (BMUS) Collection, the Queen Mother's Hospital,
Glasgow
British Medical Ultrasound Group, (BMUG), Bulletin ofThe BMUG, No.1, March, 1970-
No. 20, September, 1977.
British Medical Ultrasound Society, (BMUS), Bulletin ofthe BMUS, No. 21, February 1978
- No. 54, October, 1990.
Health Equipment Information, (1979), 'Evaluation of real-time ultrasonic scanners - first
report', August issue, No. 81, p32. (Ultrasonic Equipment Index, Folder AAAAA).
Ultrasonic Equipment Index, BB4, (BMUS Historical Collection).
Ultrasound Manufacturers literature.
Western Regional Hospital Board, 'Report ofthe working party on ultrasonics,' August
1971.
Brown, T., (unpublished paper), 'Development of ultrasonic scanning techniques in
Scotland, 1956-1979: personal recollections of T.G. Brown'.
Correspondence of Dr J Crichton, (Western Isles Donation).
Scottish Home and Health Department, (1979), Report on the future development of
ultrasound in Scotland, unpublished report, (Western Isles Donation).
Other archival sources
Annual Report of the Group Medical Superintendent for the Aberdeen Special Hospitals
Board of Management for 1967, p.28 (Grampian Regional Hospital Board Archives, GRHB
B2/2/14)
Anon, (1998), 'Obstetric ultrasound service in Grampian: working document to establish
the past, present and future provision of obstetric ultrasound for Grampian,' Aberdeen (no
publisher given), donated by Dr. Norman Smith.
Property & Works Committee Minutes, 28 November 1967, Minutes of the North-Eastern
Regional Hospital Board (Grampian Regional Health Board Archives, GRHB AlIl/10).
290
Official Publications
Medical Research Council, (1986), 'Report on an ad hoc meeting on the risks and benefits
of obstetric ultrasound,' London, Medical Research Council.
Registrar General, (1980), Annual Report ofthe Registrar Generalfor Scotland, 1978,
General Register Office, Edinburgh.
Registrar General, (1991), Annual Report ofthe Registrar Generalfor Scotland, 1990,
General Register Office, Edinburgh.
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG), (1984), 'Report of the RCOG
vvorking party on routine ultrasound examination in pregnancy, ' The Chameleon Press Ltd,
London.
Scottish Home and Health Department/Scottish Health Service Planning Council, Obstetric
Ultrasound in Scotland: Report of the Ad Hoc Group appointed by the Specialty sub-
committee for Obstetrics and Gynaecology of the National Medical Consultative
Committee, Edinburgh, Her Majesty's Stationary Office, 1988.
291
Published sources
Adam, A.H., Robinson, H.P., Fleming, J.E.E., Hall, AJ., (1978), 'A comparison of
biparietal diameter measurements using a real-time scanner and a conventional scanner
equipped with a coded cephalometry system,' British Journal ofObstetrics and
Gynaecology, Vol. 85, pp. 487-91.
Adorno, T. & Horkheimer, M., (1972), Dialectic ofEnlightenment, Herder, New York.
Alexander, R.C., (1999), The inventor ofstereo: the life and works ofAlan Dower Blumlein,
Focal Press, Oxford.
Armstrong, D., (1993), 'Public health spaces and the fabrication of identity,' Sociology,
Vol. 27, No.3, pp.393-410.
idem., (1983), Political anatomy ofthe body: medical knowledge in Britain in the 20lh
century, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Atkinson, P. & Wells, P.N., (1977), 'Pulse-Doppler ultrasound and its clinical application,'
Yale journal ofbiology and medicine, Vol. 50, No.4, pp.367-73.
Baker, J.P., (1996), The machine in the nursery: incubator technology and the origins of
newborn intensive care, Johns Hopkins UP, Baltimore & London.
Baker, P.S., Yoels, W.C. & Clair, J.M., (1996), 'Emotional expression during medical
encounters: social dis-ease and the medical gaze' in James, V. & Gabe, J., (eds.), Health
and SOCiology ofemotions, Sociology of Health and Illness monograph series, Blackwell,
Oxford, pp. 173-200.
Balfour, R.P., 'Use ofa real-time ultrasound scanner in district antenatal clinics,' British
Journal ofObstetrics and Gynaecology, 1978, Vol 85, pp 492-494.
Banta, H.D., (1984), 'Embracing or rejecting innovations: clinical diffusion of health care
technology,' in Reiser, SJ. & Anbar, M., (eds.), The machine at the bedside: strategies for
using technology in patient care, Cambridge UP, Cambridge, pp. 65-92.
idem., (1980), 'The diffusion of the computed tomography (CT) scanner in the United
States,' International Journal ofHealth Services, Vol. 10, No.2, pp. 251-69.
Barnes, B. & Edge, D., (1982), Science in context: readings in the sociology o.fscience,
Open UP, Milton Keynes.
Barnes, B., Bloor, D. & Henry, J., (1996), Scientific knowledge: a sociological analysis,
Athlone, London.
Barnett, E., (1972), 'Ultrasound in abdominal conditions,' Radiography, Vol. 38, No. 453,
pp.233-41.
Barnett, E. & Morley, P., (1971), 'Ultrasound in the investigation of space-occupying
lesions of the urinary tract, 'British journal o.fradiology, Vol. 44, No. 526, pp.733-42.
292
idem., (1972), 'Diagnostic ultrasound in renal disease,' British medical bulletin, Vol. 28,
No.3, pp.196-9.
Basalla, G., (1988), The evolution oftechnology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Barthes, R., (2000), Camera lucida, Vintage, London.
Bijker, W.E., (1995), Ofbicycles, bakelites and bulbs: toward a theOlY ofsociotechnical
change, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
idem., (1992), 'The social construction of fluorescent lighting, or how an artifact was
invented in its diffusion stage,' in Bijker, W.E. & Law, l, (eds.), Shaping
technology/building society: studies in sociotechnical change, MIT Press, Cambridge
Mass., pp. 75-104.
Bijker, W.E. & Law, l, (eds.), (1992), Shaping technology/building society: studies in
sociotechnical change, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, T.l, (eds.), (1987), The social construction of
technological systems, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Blackiston's Gould Medical Dictionary - second edition, (1979), McGraw-Hill Publishing
Company, New York.
Blackwell, RJ., (1980), 'The basic physical principles of real-time ultrasound scanning,' in
Bennett, MJ., & Campbell, S., (eds.), Real-time ultrasound in obstetrics, Blackwell
Scientific Publications, Oxford, London & Edinburgh, pp. 1-26.
Bloor, D. (1976), Knowledge and social imagery, Routledge, London.
Blume, S.S., (1992), Insight and industlY: on the dynamics oftechnological change in
medicine, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass. and London.
Bom, N., Lancee, C.T., Honkoop, l, Hugenholtz, P.G., (1971), 'Ultrasonic viewer for
cross-sectional analysis of moving cardiac structures,' Biomedical engineering, Vol. 6, pp.
500-503.
Braverman, H., (1974), Labour and monopoly capital: the degradation ofwork in the
twentieth century, Monthly Review Press, New York.
Bryman, A., (1988), Quantity and quality in social research, Routledge, London.
Burns, R., (2000), The life and times ofA.D. Blumlein, Institution of Electrical Engineers in
association with the Science Museum, London.
Buschmann, W.H., (1966), 'Diagnostic ultrasonography in ophthalmology,' Journal ofthe
all-India ophthalmological society, Vol. 14, No.3, pp. 105-16.
Buschmann, W. & Hauff, D., (1967), 'Results of diagnostic ultrasonography in
ophthalmology,' Americanjournal ofophthalmology, Vol. 63, No.5, pp.926-33.
293
CalIon, M., (1987), 'Society in the making: the study of technology as a tool for
sociological analysis,' in Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, TJ., (eds.), The social
construction oftechnological systems, pp. 83-103.
CalIon, M., Law, l & Rip, A., (eds.), (1986), Mapping the dynamics ofscience and
technology, Macmillan, Basingstoke.
Campbell, S., (1977), 'Early prenatal diagnosis of neural tube defects by ultrasound,'
Clinical obstetrics and gynaecology, Vol. 4, pp. 351-59.
Campbell, S., (1974), 'Fetal growth,' Clinical obstetrics and gynaecology, Vol. 1, pp. 41-
65.
Campbell, S., (1970), 'Ultrasonic fetal cephalometry by ultrasound,' Journal ofobstetrics
and gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth, Vol. 77, pp. 1057-63.
Campbell, S., (1968), 'An improved method of fetal cephalometry by ultrasound,' Journal
ofobstetrics and gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth, Vol. 75, pp. 568-76.
Campbell, S. & Dewhurst, CJ., (1971), 'Diagnosis of the small for dates fetus be serial
ultrasound cephalometry,' Lancet, Vol. 2, pp. 1002-6.
Campbell, S. & Little, D.l, (1980), 'Clinical potential of real-time ultrasound,' in Bennett,
M.l & Campbell, S., (eds.), The basic physical principles ofreal-time ultrasound scanning,
pp.34-35.
Campbell, S. & Newman, G.B., (1971), 'Growth of fetal biparietal diameter during normal
pregnancy,' Journal ofobstetrics and gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth, Vol. 78,
No.6, pp. 513-9.
Campbell, S. & Wilkin, D., (1975), 'Ultrasonic measurements of the fetal abdominal
circumference in estimation of fetal weight,' British journal ofobstetrics and gynaecology,
Vol. 82, pp. 689-97.
Campbell, S., Diaz-Recasens, l, Griffin, D.R. et aI, (1983), 'New Doppler technique for
assessing blood flow', Lancet, Vol. 1, pp. 675-77.
Campbell, S., Johnstone, F.D., Holt, E.M. & May, P., (1972), 'Anencephaly: early
ultrasonic diagnosis and active management,' Lancet, Vol. 2, pp. 1226-7.
Campbell, S., Warsof, S.L., Little, D. & Cooper, DJ., (1985), 'Routine ultrasound screening
for the prediction of gestational age,' Obstetrics and gynaecology, Vol. 65, pp. 613-20.
Cartwright, L., (1995), Screening the body: tracing medicine's visual culture, University of
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis & London.
Casper, M.l & Clarke, A.E., (1998), 'Making the Pap Smear into the "right tool" for the
job: cervical cancer screening in the USA circa 1940-95,' Social studies o.j'science, Vol. 28,
No.2, pp. 255-90.
294
Clarke, A.E. & Fujimura, J.H., (eds.), (1992), The right tools for thejob: at work in
twentieth century life sciences, Princeton University Press, Princeton N.J.
Clifford, P.C., Skidmore, R., Bird, D.R., Lusby, R.J., Baird, R.N., Woodcock, J.P. & Wells,
P.N., (1980), 'Pulsed Doppler and real-time "duplex" imaging of dacron arterial grafts,'
Ultrasonic imaging, Vol. 2, No.4, pp. 381-90.
Collins, H., (1982), (ed.), Sociology ofscientific knowledge, Bath University Press, Bath.
Collins, H. & Pinch, T., (1993), The golem: what everyone should know about science,
Cambridge UP, Cambridge.
Corrigan, P., (1997), The sociology ofconsumption : an introduction, Sage, London.
Curran, W.J., (1984), 'The unwanted suitor: law and the use of health care technology,' in
Reiser, S.J. & Anbar, M., (eds.), The machine atthe bedside, pp. 119-134.
Davidson, J.K., Morley, P., Hurley, G.D. & Holford, N.G., (1975), 'Adrenal venography
and ultrasound in the investigation of the adrenal gland: an analysis of 58 cases,' British
journal ofradiology, Vol. 48, No. 570, pp.435-50.
Davison, J.M., Lind, T., Farr, V., Whittingham, T.A., (1973), 'The limitations of ultrasonic
fetal cephalometry,' Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth,
Vol. 80, No.9, pp. 769-75.
Dey, 1., (1993), Qualitative data analysis, Routledge, London.
Donald, 1., (1976), 'The biological effects of ultrasound,' in Donald, 1. & Levi, S., (eds.),
Present andfuture ofdiagnostic ultrasound, Wiley, New York and London.
idem., (1974), 'Apologia: how and why medical sonar developed,' Anals ofthe Royal
College ofSurgeons ofEngland, Vol. 54, pp.?
idem., (1974), 'Sonar - the story of an experiment,' Ultrasound in medicine and biology,
VoLl, pp??
idem., (1969), Practical obstetric problems, 4th edition, Lloyd-Lukes (Medical Books) Ltd.,
London.
idem., (1963), 'Use of ultrasonics in diagnosis of abdominal swellings,' British Medical
Journal, No.2., p. 1154.
Donald,1. & Abdulla, U., (1968), 'Placentography by sonar,' Journal ofObstetrics and
Gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth', Vol. 75, No.1 0, pp?
Donald,!., MacVicar, J. & Brown, T., (1958), 'Investigation of abdominal masses by pulsed
ultrasound,' Lancet, No.1, pp.1188-1195.
295
Donald, I., Morley, P. & Barnett E.,(1972), 'The diagnosis of blighted ovum by sonar'
Journal ofobstetrics and gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth, Vol. 79, No.4,
pp.304-10.
Downey, G.L. & Dumit, J., (eds.), (1997), Cyborgs and citadels, School of American
Research Press, Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Diiden, B., (1993), Disembodying women: perspectives on pregnancy and the unborn,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass. & London.
Durtis, J.D., Cohen, W.N., Richerson, H.B., White, c.A., (1972), 'The importance of
placental localization preceding amniocentesis,' Obstetrics and gynaecology, Vol. 40, No.
2, pp. 194-8.
Edgerton, D., (1996), Science, technology and the British industrial 'decline', 1870-1970,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Ehrenreich, B. & English, D., (1979), For her own good: 150 years ofthe expert's advice to
women, Pluto Press, London.
Evans, F., (1985), 'Managers and labourers: women's attitudes to reproductive
technologies,' in Faulkner, W. & Arnold, E., (eds.), Smothered by invention, Pluto Press,
London.
Featherstone, M., (1987), 'Lifestyle and consumer culture,' TheOly, culture and society,
Vol. 4, pp. 55-70.
idem., (1990), 'Global culture: an introduction,' in Featherstone, M., (ed.), Global culture:
nationalism,globalization and modernity, Sage, London.
idem., (1992), Consumer culture andpostmodernism, Sage, London.
Fleming, J.E.E., (2001), 'Ultrasound: the Glasgow factor,' in Wilson, D.B. & Geyer-
Kordesch, J., (eds.), Physics andphysic: essays in memOlY ofJohn MA. Lenihan,
Wellcome Unit for the History of Medicine, Glasgow, pp.63-79.
Fleming, lE.E. & McNay, M.B., (1999), 'Forty years of obstetric ultrasound 1957-1997:
from A-scope to three dimensions,' Ultrasound in medicine and biology, Vol. 25, No.1,
pp.3-56.
Fleming, lE.E., Hall, A.J., Robinson, H.P., Wittman, B.K., (1978), 'Electronic area and
perimeter measurement of ultrasonic images,' Journal ofClinical Ultrasound, Vol. 6, pp.
379-84.
Fleming, lE.E., Spencer, I.H. & Nicolson, M.A., (1997), '40 years of ultrasound', in
Cockburn, F., (ed.), Advances in perinatal medicine: proceedings o[the XVth Eurpoean
Congress ofperinatal medicine Glasgow, Parthenon Publishing Group, New York &
London, pp.92-99.
296
Fletcher, J.C. & Evans, M.l., (1983), 'Maternal bonding in early fetal ultrasound
examinations' New Englandjournal ofmedicine, Vol. 308, No.7, pp. 392-3.
Ford, N.M., (1988), When did I begin? Conception ofthe human individual in history,
philosophy and science, Cambridge UP, Cambridge.
Garcia, J., Bricker, L., Henderson, l, Martin, M., Mugford, M., Nielson, l & Roberts, T.,
(2002), 'Women's views ofpregnancy ultrasound: a systematic review' Birth, Vol. 29, No.
4, pp. 225-250.
Gennser, G. & Marsal, K., (1979), 'Fetal breathing movements monitored by real-time B-
mode ultrasound: basal appearance and response to challenges,' Contributions in
gynaecology and obstetrics, Vol. 6, pp. 66-79.
Goldman, R. & Papson, S., (1996), Sign wars: the cluttered landscape ofadvertising,
Guilford Press, London and New York.
Greene, G., (1999), The woman who knew too much: Alice Stewart and the secrets of
radiation, University of Michigan Press, Michigan.
Greig, R., (1995), Pregnancy in a high-tech age - paradoxes ofchoice, New York UP, New
York.
Hall, Al & Fleming, lE.E., (1980), 'A coded cephalometer for multiple measurements of
biparietal diameter,' Ultrasound in medicine and biology, Vol. 6, pp. 285-9.
Hall, AJ., Fleming, lE.E. & Abdulla, U., (1970), 'Ultrasonic fetal cephalometry: some
improvements and future developments,' Ultrasonics, Vol. 8., pp. 34-5.
Harrison, R., Campbell, S. & Craft, 1., (1975), 'Risks of fetomaternal hemorrhage resulting
from amniocentesis with and without ultrasound placental localization,' Obstetrics and
gynaecology, Vol. 46, No.4, pp. 389-91.
Hartouni, V., (1997), Cultural conceptions: on reproductive technologies and the remaking
oflife, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis and London.
Hayles, N.K., (1999), How we became posthuman: virtual bodies in cybernetics, literature
and informatics, University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London.
Hiddinga, A, (1992), 'X-ray technology in obstetrics: measuring pelves at the Yale School
of Medicine,' in Pickstone, lV., (ed.), Medical innovations in historical perspective, St.
Martins Press, New York.
Hiddinga, A & Blume, S.S., (1992), 'Technology, science and obstetric practice: the
origins and transformation of cephalopelvimetry,, Science, technology and human values,
Vol. 17, pp.154-179.
Hobbins, J.C., Winsberg, F. & Berkowitz, R.L., (1983), Ultrasonography in obstetrics and
gynaecology (2nd edition), Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore.
297
Howell, J.D., (1995), Technology in the hospital: transforming patient care in the early
twentieth century, John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore & London.
Howry, D.H. & Bliss, W.R., (1952), 'Ultrasonic visualisation of soft tissue structures of the
body,' Journal oflaboratory and clinical medicine, Vol. 40, pp.579-92.
Hughes, T.P., (1999), 'Edison and electric light,' in MacKenzie, D. & Wajcman, J., (eds),
The social shaping oftechnology: 2nd
edition, Open University Press, Buckingham, pp.50-
63.
idem., (1987), 'The evolution oflarge technological systems,' in Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P.
& Pinch, T., (eds.), The social construction oftechnological systems, pp. 51-82.
idem., (1983), Networks ofpower: electrification in western society, 1880-1930, Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore & London.
idem., (1979), 'The electrification of America: the systems builders,' Technology & culture,
Vol. 20, pp. 124-161.
Inch, S., (1982), Birthrights: a parent's guide to modern childbirth, Hutchinson & Co.,
London.
Jacobus, M., Fox Keller, E. & Shuttleworth, S., (eds.), (1990), Body/politics: women and
the discourses ofscience, Routledge, London and New York.
Jameson, F., (1984), 'Postmodernism or the cultural logic oflate capitalism,' New Left
Review, Vol. 146, pp. 53-92.
Jennett, B., (1986), High technology medicine: benefits and burdens, Oxford UP, Oxford.
Jewson, N., (1976), 'The disappearance of the sick man from medical cosmology, 1770-
1870,' Sociology, Vol. 10, pp. 225-244.
Jhally, S., (1990), The codes ofadvertising: fetishism and the political economy ofmeaning
in the consumer society, Routledge, London.
Jordan, K. & Lynch, M., (1992), 'The sociology of a genetic engineering technique: ritual
and rationality in the performance of the "plasmid prep",' in Clarke, A.E. & Fujimura, J.H.,
(eds.), The right tools for the job, pp. 77-114.
Kapsalis, T., (1997), Public privates: performing gynecologyji-om both ends ofthe
speculum, Duke UP, Durham and London.
Kerenyi, T.D. & Walker, B., (1977), 'The preventability of "bloody taps" in second
trimester amniocentesis by ultrasound scanning,' Obstetrics and gynaecology, Vol. 50,
No.1, pp. 61-4.
Klein, N., (2000), No logo, Flamingo, London.
298
Koch, E.B., (1993), 'In the image of science? Negotiating the development of diagnostic
ultrasound in the cultures of surgery and radiology,' Technology and culture, Vol. 34,
pp.858-893.
idem., (1990), 'The process of innovation in medical technology: American research on
ultrasound, 1947-1962' unpublished PhD Thesis submitted to the University of
Pennsylvania.
Kossoff, G., Garrett, W.1. & Radovanovich, G., (1973), 'Grey scale echography in
obstetrics and gynaecology,' Australasian Radiology, Vol. 18, pp. 62-111.
Kranakis, E., (1997), Constructing a bridge: an exploration ofengineering culture, design,
and research in nineteenth-centwy France and America, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Kyle, K.F., Deane, R.F., Morley, P. & Barnett, E., (1971), 'Ultrasonography of the urinary
tract,' Britishjournal ofurology, Vol. 43, No.6, pp.709-17.
Lafollette, M.e. & Stine, 1.K., (eds.), (1991), Technology and choice: readingsfi'om
technology and culture, University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London.
Latour, B., (1996), Aramis or the love oftechnology, Harvard UP, Cambridge, Mass.
idem., (1993), The Pasteurization ofFrance, (transl. Sheridan, A. & Law, 1.), Harvard UP,
Cambridge Mass. and London.
idem., (1992), 'Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few mundane artifacts' in
Bijker, W.E. & Law, 1., (eds.), Shaping technology/building society: studies in socio-
technical change, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass, pp225-58.
idem., (1987), Science in action: how to follow scientists and engineers through society,
Harvard UP, Cambridge, Mass.
idem., (1986), 'Visualisation and cognition: thinking with eyes and hands' Knowledge and
society: studies in the sociology ofculture past andpresent, Vol. 6, pp.I-40.
idem., (1983), 'Give me a laboratory and I will raise the world' in Knorr-Cetina, K. &
Mulkay, M., (eds.), Science observed: perspectives on the social study ofscience, Sage,
London.
Latour, B. & Woolgar, S., (1979), Laborat01Y life, Sage, London & Beverly Hills.
Law, 1., (ed.), (1991), A sociology ofmonsters: essays on power, technology and
domination, Routledge, London.
idem., (1987), 'Technology and heterogeneous engineering: the case of Portuguese
expansion,' in Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, T.J., (eds.), The social construction of
technological systems, pp.III-34.
Law, 1. & Hassard, 1., (eds.), (1999), Actor network the01Y and C{[ter, Blackwell, Oxford.
299
Lawrence, C., (ed.), (1992), Medical theOlY, surgical practice: studies in the histOlY of
surgery, Routledge, London and New York.
Lawrence, C., (1985), 'Incommunicable knowledge: science, technology and the clinical art
in Britain, 1850-1914,' Journal ofcontemporary history, Vol. 20, pp.503-20.
Lawrence, G., (ed.), (1994), Technologies ofmodern medicine, Science Museum, London.
Lenihan, J., (1948), 'The velocity of sound in air,' PhD Thesis submitted to the University
of Glasgow).
Levack, I. & Dudley, H., (1992), Aberdeen Royal Injirmmy: the people's hospital ofthe
North-East, Bailliere Tindall, London.
Levi, S., (1997), 'The history of ultrasound in gynecology 1950-1980,' Ultrasound in
medicine and biology, Vol. 23, No.3, pp. 481-552.
Liebeskind, D., Padawar, J., Wolley, R, Bases, R., (1982), 'Diagnostic ultrasound time
lapse and transmission electron microscopic studies of cells insonated in vitro,' British
journal ofcancer, Vol. 45 (suppl.), pp. 176-86.
Liebeskind, D.E., Baes, R, Mendez, F., Elequin, F., Koenigberg, M., (1979), 'Sister
chromatid exchanges in human lymphocytes after exposure to diagnostic ultrasound,'
Science, Vol. 205, pp. 1273-5.
Liebeskind, D.E., Bases, R, Elequin, F., Neubort, S., Leifer, R, Goldberg, R, Koenigsberg,
M., (1979), 'Diagnostic ultrasound: effects on the DNA and growth patterns of animal
cells,' Radiology, Vol. 131, pp. 177-84.
Lundvall, B., (ed.), (1995), National systems ofinnovation: towards a theOlY ofinnovation
and interactive learning, Pinter, London.
Lynch, M., (1985), 'Discipline and the material form of images: an analysis of scientific
visibility,' Social studies ofscience, Vol. 15, pp. 37-66.
MacKenzie, D., (1996), Knowing machines: essays on technical change, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass. &London.
idem., (1993), Inventing accuracy: a historical sociology ofnuclear missile guidance, MIT
Press, Cambridge Mass. & London.
MacKenzie, D. & Wacjman, J., (eds.), (1999), The social shaping oftechnology: 2nd
edition,
Oxford UP, Oxford.
MacKenzie, D. & Wajcman, J., (eds.), (1985), The social shaping oftechnology: how the
refrigerator got its hum, Open UP, Milton Keynes.
MacVicar, 1. & Donald, I., (1963), 'Sonar in the diagnosis of early pregnancy and its
complications,' The Journal ofObstetrics and Gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth,
Vol. LXX, No.3, pp.387-395.
300
Mallard, J., (1996), 'The first century of hospital physics 1895-1995, the evolution of
medical imaging 1945-1995, with Aberdeen's role 1965-1995,' in Adam, A., Smith, D. &
Watson, F., (eds.), 'To the greit support and advancement ofhefth ': papers on the histOlY of
medicine in Aberdeen, arisingfrom a conference held during the quincentenaty year of
Aberdeen University, Aberdeen History of Medicine Publications, Aberdeen.
Mallard, J.R. & Corfield, J.R., (1969), 'A statistical model for the visualisation of changes
in the count density on radioisotope scanning displays,' Britishjournal ofradiology, Vol.
42, No.499, pp.530-38.
Mallard, J.R. & Kent, M., (1969), 'Electron spin resonance in biological tissues,' Physics in
medicine and biology, Vol. 14, No.3, pp.373-96.
McDicken, W.N., (1976), Diagnostic ultrasonics, principles and use ofinstruments, Crosby
Lockwood Staples, London.
McKinlay, J.B., (1981), 'From "promising report" to "standard procedure": seven stages in
the career of a medical innovation' Millbank memorialfund quarterly, Vol. 59, No.3, pp.
374-411.
Mokyr, J., (1996), 'Evolution and technological change: a new metaphor for economic
history?' in Fox, R., (ed), Technological change, Harwood Academic Publishers,
Amsterdam, pp. 63-83.
Morley, P. & Barnett, E., (1970), 'The role of ultrasound in the diagnosis of pelvic masses'
British journal ofradiology, Vol. 43, No. 513, pp. 602-16.
Morley, P., Barnett, E., Bell, P.R., Briggs, J.K., CaIman, K.C., Hamilton, D.N. & Paton,
A.M., (1975), 'Ultrasound in the diagnosis of fluid collections following renal
transplantation' Clinical radiology, Vol. 26, No.2, pp. 199-207.
Mulkay, M., (1991), Sociology ofscience: a sociological pilgrimage, Open UP, Milton
Keynes.
Nachmias, C. & Nachmias, D., (1992), Research methods in the social sciences, 4th edition,
Edward Arnold, Sevenoaks.
Nava, M., (1997), Buy this book: studies in advertiSing and consumption, Routledge,
London.
Neldam, S. & Pedersen, J.F., (1980), 'Fetal heart rate response to amniocentesis in early
pregnancy' Journal ofperinatal medicine, Vol. 8, No.4, pp. 209-12.
Nettleton, (1992), Power, pain and dentistlY, Open University Press, Buckingham,
Philidelphia.
Nettleton, S. & Bunten, R., (1995), The sociology ofhealth promotion: critical analyses of
consumption, lifestyle and risk, Routledge, London.
301
Newman, K., (1996), Fetal positions: individualism, science, visuality, Stanford UP,
Stanford, Calif.
Oakley, A., (1987), 'From walking wombs to test-tube babies' in Stanworth, M., (ed.),
Reproductive technologies: gender, motherhood and medicine, Polity Press in association
with Basil Blackwell, Cambridge.
idem., (1985), Sociology ofhousework: 2nd
edition, Blackwell, Cambridge Mass.
idem., (1984), The captured womb: a history ofthe medical care ofpregnant women,
Blackwell, Oxford.
Oakley, A. & Graham, H., (1981), 'Competing ideologies of pregnancy' in Roberts, H.,
(ed.), Women, health and reproduction, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
Oakley, A., McPherson, A., Roberts, H., (1990), Miscarriage, Penguin Books, London.
Pacey, A., (1999), Meaning in technology, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Pasveer, B., (1992), Shadows ofknowledge, making a representing practice in medicine: x-
ray pictures andpulmonGlY tuberculosis, 1895-1930, PhD Thesis submitted to the
University of Amsterdam, published by CIP-Gegevens Koninklijke Bibliotheek, Den Haag.
idem., (1990), 'Knowledge of shadows: the introduction of x-ray images in medicine'
Sociology ofhealth and illness, Vol. 11, No.4, pp. 360-81.
Perks, R. & Thomson, A., (eds.), (1997), The oral history reader, Routledge, New York.
Perks, R., (1992), Oral history: talking about the past, Historical Association in association
with the Oral History Society, London.
Petchesky, R., (1987), 'Fetal images: the power of visual culture and the politics of
reproduction,' Feminist Studies, Vol. 2, No.2, pp. 263-93.
Pickering, A., (1995), 'Cyborg history and the World War II regime,' Perspectives on
science, Vol. 3, No.1, pp. 1-48.
idem., (1995), The mangle ofpractice: time agency and science, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago and London.
Pickstone, lV., (2000), Ways ofknowing: a new histOlY ofscience, technology and
medicine, Manchester UP, Manchester.
idem., (ed.), (1992), Medical innovations in historical perspective, St. Martins Press, New
York.
Pinch T. & Bijker, W., (1986), 'Science, technology and the new sociology of technology:
reply to Russell,' Social studies ofscience, Vol. 16, pp. 347-60.
302
Pinch, T. & Bijker, W., (1984), 'The social construction of facts and artifacts; or how the
sociology of science and the sociology of technology might benefit each other,' Social
studies ofscience, Vol. 14, pp. 399-441.
Rapp, R., (1997), 'Real-time fetus: the role of the sonogram in the age of monitored
reproduction' in Downey, G.L. & Dumit, 1., (eds.), Cyborgs and citadels, School of
American Research Press, Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Rapp, R., (2000), Testing women, testing the fetus: the social impact ofamniocentesis in
America, Routledge, New York & London.
Reading, A.E., Cox, D.N., Sledmere, L.M. & Campbell, S., (1984), 'Psychological changes
over the course of pregnancy: a study of attitudes toward the fetus/neonate' Health
psychology, Vol. 3, No.3, pp. 211-21.
Reiser, S.J., (1978), Medicine and the reign oftechnology, Cambridge UP, Cambridge.
Robinson, H.P., (1978), 'The evaluation of early pregnancy and its complications by
diagnostic ultrasound,' University of Glasgow, M.D. Thesis.
idem., (1973), 'Early detection of fetal heart movement by sonar,' Ultrasonics, Vol. 11, No.
2, pp. 52-4.
idem., (1972), 'Detection of fetal heart movement in first trimester pregnancy using pulsed
sonar,' BMJ, Vol. 25, No.4, pp. 466-8.
Robinson, H.P. & Fleming, J.E.E., (1975), 'A critical evaluation of sonar "crown-rump"
length measurements,' British journal ofobstetrics and gynaecology, Vol. 82, No.9, pp.
702-10.
Robinson, H.P. & Shaw-Dunn, 1., (1973), 'Fetal heart rates as determined by sonar in early
pregnancy,' Journal ofobstetrics and gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth, Vol. 80,
No.9, pp. 805-9.
Rosen, P., (1993), 'The social construction of mountain bikes: technology and
postmodernity in the cycle industry', Social studies ofscience, Vol. 23, pp. 479-513.
Rosenberg, N., (1982), Inside the black box: technology and economics, Cambridge UP,
Cambridge.
idem., (1976), Perspectives on technology, Cambridge UP, Cambridge.
Rowland, R., (1992), Living laboratories: women and reproductive technologies, Lime
Tree, London.
Russell, S., (1986), 'The social construction ofartifacts: a response to Pinch and Bijker,'
Social studies ofscience, Vol. 16, pp. 331-46.
303
Saetnan, A.R., (forthcoming), 'Thirteen women's narratives of pregnancy, ultrasound and
self in Saetnan, A.R., Oudshoorn, N. & Kiejczyk, M., (eds.), Localizing and globalizing
reproductive technologies, Ohio State University Press, Ohio.
Schwartz Cowan, R., (1985), 'How the refrigerator got its hum' in MacKenzie, D. &
Wajcman, J., (eds.), The social shaping oftechnology: how the refrigerator got its hum,
Open UP, Milton Keynes, pp. 202-218.
Schwartz Cowan, R., (1987), 'The consumption junction: a proposal for research strategies
in the sociology of technology' in Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, TJ., (eds.), The
social construction oftechnological systems, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp. 261-280.
idem., (1983), More workfor mother: the ironies ofhousehold technologyfrom the open
hearth to the microwave, Basic Books, New York.
Scott, P., (1991), 'Levers and counterweights: a laboratory that failed to raise the world'
Social studies ofscience, Vol. 21, pp. 7-35.
Selby RDS, Hutchison JMS, Mallard JR, (1980) 'The Aberdeen phased array: A real-time
ultrasonic scanner with dynamic focus' Medicine and biological engineering and
computing, Vol. 18, pp. 335-343.
Shapin, S., (1982), 'The politics of observation: cerebral anatomy and social interests in the
Edinburgh phrenology disputes' in Collins, H., (ed.), Sociology ofscientific knowledge,
Bath UP, Bath.
Sinclair, J., (1987), Images inc01porated : advertising as industlY and ideology, Croom
Helm, London.
Soderqvist, T., (ed.), (1997), The historiography ofcontemporary science and technology,
Harwood Academic Publishers, Amsterdam.
Stanton, J., (ed.), (2002), Innovations in health and medicine: diffusion and resistance in the
twentieth century, Routledge, London.
Stanworth, M., (ed.), (1987), Reproductive technologies: gender, motherhood & medicine,
Polity Press, Cambridge.
Stevens, R., (1966), Medical practice in modern England: the impact ofspecialization and
state medicine, Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn.
Stewart, A., Webb, J., Giles, D., Hewett, D., (1956), 'Malignant disease in childhood and
diagnostic irradiation in utero,' Lancet, Vol. 2., p. 447.
Stoeckle, J.D., (ed.), (1987), Encounters betyjieen patients and doctors: an anthology, MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Sulkunen, P., (1997), (ed.), Constructing the new consumer society, Macmillan Press,
Houndmills.
304
Sunden, B., (1964), 'On the diagnostic value of ultrasound in obstetrics and gynaecology,'
Acta obstetrica et gynaecologica Scandinavica, Vol. 43, (suppl. 6).
Tansey, E.M. & Christie, D.A, (eds.), (2000), Wellcome witness to twentieth centwy
medicine, Vol 5. Looking at the unborn: historical aspects ofobstetric ultrasound, The
Wellcome Trust Publishing Department, London.
Tansey, E.M., Christie, D.A & Reynolds, L.A, (eds.), (1998), Wellcome witnesses to
twentieth century medicine, volume 2. Making the body more transparent: the impact of
nuclear magnetic resonance and magnetic resonance imaging, The Wellcome Trust,
London.
The Shorter Oxford English dictionary on historical principles, Volume 1 (1973 edition),
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Thompson, P., (1989), The nature ofwork: an introduction to debates on the labour
process, 2nd
edition, Macmillan, Basingstoke.
Thompson, P., (1978), Voice ofthe past: oral history, Oxford UP, Oxford.
Thorpe, C. & Shapin, S., (2000), 'Who was Robert J. Oppenheimer? Charisma and social
organisation' Social studies ofscience, Vol. 30, No.4, pp. 545-90.
Tomlinson, A, (1990), 'Introduction: consumer culture and the aura of the commodity' in
Tomlinson, A, (ed.), Consumption, identity and style: marketing, meaning and the
packaging ofpleasure, Routledge, London, pp. 1-38.
Wajcman, J., (1991), Feminism confronts technology, Polity Press, Cambridge.
Walton, J., Beeson, P.B. & Scott, R.B., (eds.), (1986), The Oxford companion to medicine ~
volume L Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Webster, A, (1991), Science, technology and society: new directions, Macmillan, London.
Webster, J., (1990), Office automation: the labour process and womens work in Britain,
HarvesteriWheatsheaf, Hemel Hempstead.
idem., (1985), 'Word processing and the secretarial labour process' in Purcell, K, (ed.), The
changing experience ofemployment, Macmillan, Basingstoke.
Weir, L., (1996), 'Recent developments in the government of pregnancy,' Economy and
society, Vol. 25, No.3, pp. 372-92.
Wells, P.N., (1975), 'Review: absorption and dispersion of ultrasound in biological tissue,'
Ultrasound in medicine and biology, Vol. 1, No.4, pp.369-76.
idem., (1970), 'Doppler range finding' Britishjournal ofradiology, Vol. 43, p.229.
idem., (1970), 'The directivities of some ultrasonic Doppler probes' Medical and biological
engineering, Vol. 8, No.3, pp. 241-56.
305
idem., (1969), 'A range gated ultrasonic Doppler system' Medical and biological
engineering, Vol. 7, No.6, pp. 641-52.
idem., (1969), 'A nomogram for the calculation of Doppler frequency shift,' Ultrasonics,
Vol. 7, No.1, pp. 18-19.
Wells, P.N., Halliwell, M. & Mountford, R.A., (1974), 'A method of display dynamic range
expansion using system gain wobbulation' Ultrasound in medicine and biology, Vol. 1, No.
2, pp. 179-81.
White, D.N., (1988), 'Neurosonology pioneers,' Ultrasound in medicine and biology, Vol.
14, pp. 541-61.
Whitfield, C.R., (1992), 'Training in ultrasound in obstetrics and gynaecology' in
Chervanek, F., Isaacson, G. & Campbell, S., (eds.), Ultrasound in obstetrics and
gynaecology, Little, Brown and Co., Boston, Mass.
Wild, J.J., (1950), 'The use of ultrasonic pulses for the measurement of biological tissues
and the detection of tissue density changes' SurgelY, Vol. 27, pp. 183-88.
Willocks, J., (1996), 'Medical ultrasound - a Glasgow development which swept the world'
Glasgow University Avenue, No. 19.
idem., (1963), 'Foetal cephalometry by ultrasound and its place in clinical obstetrics'
unpublished MD Thesis submitted to the University of Glasgow.
idem., (1962), 'The use of ultrasonic cephalometry,' Proceedings ofthe Royal Society of
Medicine, No. 55, p. 640.
Willocks, J., Donald, 1., Duggan, T.e. & Day, N., (1964), 'Foetal cephalometry by
ultrasound' Journal ofObstetrics and Gynaecology ofthe British Commonwealth, No. 71,
pp. 11-20.
Wolbarst, A.B., (1999), Looking within: how x-ray, CT, ultrasound, and other medical
images are created, and how they help physicians save lives, University of California Press,
Berkeley, Los Angeles and London.
Woo, J. A short history ofultrasound in obstetrics and gynaecology, www.ob-
ultrasound.net/pwells, (accessed 12/8/99).
Wood, S., (1982), (ed.), The degradation ofwork? Skill, deskilling and the labour process,
Hutchinson, London.
Woolgar, S., (1981), 'Interests and explanation in the social study of science' Social studies
ofscience, Vol. 11, pp. 365-94.
www.medicine.creighton.edulradiology/ultraoffetalbiomet (accessed 11/9/02).
306
Yoxen, E., (1987), 'Seeing with sound: a study of the development of medical images' in
Bijker, W.E., Hughes, T.P. & Pinch, T.l, (eds.), The social construction o.ftechnological
systems, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass. and London, pp. 281-303.
Yoxen, E. & Hyde, B., (1985), 'Seeing with sound: the development of ultrasound
equipment in medicine' Social history ofmedicine, No. 37, pp. 93-5.
Unpublished secondary sources
Nicolson, M., (unpublished paper), 'The experiment and the image: Ian Donald's first
application of ultrasound to biological materials' .
idem., (unpublished paper), 'Ultrasound imaging and the anti-abortion debate: Ian Donald's
clinical holism'.
Nicolson, M. with Fleming J.E.E. & Spencer, L, (unpublished draft chapter), 'Ultrasound
before Donald'.
Pickering, A., (unpublished paper), 'Practice and posthumanism: social theory and a history
of agency'.
Pickering, A., (unpublished paper), 'The objects of the humanities and the time of the
cyborg' .
307
