1548 ieee transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 50, no. 11, november 2003
Design of Eﬃcient, Broadband Single-Element
(20–80 MHz) Ultrasonic Transducers for
Medical Imaging Applications
Jonathan M. Cannata, Student Member, IEEE, Timothy A. Ritter, Wo-Hsing Chen, Ronald H. Silverman,
and K. Kirk Shung, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—This paper discusses the design, fabrica-
tion, and testing of sensitive broadband lithium niobate
(LiNbO3) single-element ultrasonic transducers in the 20–
80 MHz frequency range. Transducers of varying dimen-
sions were built for an f# range of 2.0–3.1. The desired
focal depths were achieved by either casting an acoustic
lens on the transducer face or press-focusing the piezo-
electric into a spherical curvature. For designs that re-
quired electrical impedance matching, a low impedance
transmission line coaxial cable was used. All transducers
were tested in a pulse-echo arrangement, whereby the cen-
ter frequency, bandwidth, insertion loss, and focal depth
were measured. Several transducers were fabricated with
center frequencies in the 20–80 MHz range with the mea-
sured ;6 dB bandwidths and two-way insertion loss values
ranging from 57 to 74% and 9.6 to 21.3 dB, respectively.
Both transducer focusing techniques proved successful in
producing highly sensitive, high-frequency, single-element,
ultrasonic-imaging transducers. In vivo and in vitro ultra-
sonic backscatter microscope (UBM) images of human eyes
were obtained with the 50 MHz transducers. The high sen-
sitivity of these devices could possibly allow for an increase
in depth of penetration, higher image signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR), and improved image contrast at high frequencies
when compared to previously reported results.
I. Introduction
The need for improved image resolution has prompted
intensive studies in developing high-frequency imag-
ing systems. Very high frequency (>20 MHz) ultrasound
is currently used for various imaging applications in oph-
thalmology [1]–[3], dermatology [4], [5], and small animal
imaging [6], [7]. Unfortunately, the gains made by an in-
crease in device resolution come at the expense of signal
penetration depth. It has been well recognized that atten-
uative losses observed in various human soft tissues are
linearly proportional to the frequency of the propagating
sound wave [8], [9]. The increased signal loss at high fre-
quencies will limit the depth of penetration as well as the
Manuscript received January 22, 2003; accepted July 3, 2003. Fi-
nancial support was provided through NIH grant numbers P41-
RR11795 and EB00238 (RHS) and a grant from Research to Prevent
Blindness (RHS).
J. M. Cannata, T. A. Ritter, W.-H. Chen, and K. K. Shung are
with NIH Resource on Medical Ultrasonic Transducer Technology,
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Southern Cal-
ifornia, Los Angeles, CA 90089 (e-mail: cannata@usc.edu).
R. H. Silverman is with the Department of Ophthalmology, Weill
Medical College, Cornell University, New York, NY 10021.
resolution of the ultrasound beam. In order to adequately
improve images produced by high-frequency ultrasound, it
is important to take steps to optimize the sensitivity and
bandwidth of the imaging system accordingly.
Most high-frequency imaging systems are commonly
referred to as ultrasound biomicroscopes (UBM). These
scanners acquire adjacent A-scan lines by mechanically
moving a single-element transducer across the medium of
interest. The resultant RF data is displayed in the form of
a high-resolution, two-dimensional image of the tissue of
interest. The transducer performance and system electron-
ics performance greatly aﬀect image quality. In this paper,
techniques for maximizing transducer performance will be
addressed.
An ultrasonic transducer can be treated as a three-port
network, with two mechanical ports representing the front
and back of the piezoelectric element as well as an elec-
trical port representing the electrical connection of the
piezoelectric element to the system electronics [10], [11].
It is necessary to condition the transfer of energy be-
tween these mechanical and electrical transducer ports in
order to optimize the transducer performance. The most
important component of the transducer is the piezoelec-
tric element. Many diﬀerent active materials can be used
in a single-element transducer design; all have their ad-
vantages and disadvantages. Frequently used materials in-
clude piezoceramics [12], [13], piezoelectric polymers [14],
[15], and single crystals [16]. Piezoelectric polymers such as
poly(vinylidine ﬂuoride) [PVDF] and co-polymer PV(DF-
TrFE) have a low acoustic impedance (∼4 MRayl) that
is ideal for acoustic matching of the transducer to hu-
man tissue (∼1.5 MRayl). These materials also display a
low dielectric constant (εS
/ε0 < 10), ideal for electrical
impedance matching; but, unfortunately, they suﬀer from
a poor thickness mode coupling coeﬃcient (kt < 0.3) [15].
Alternately, PZT ceramics have higher electromechanical
coupling coeﬃcients (kt = 0.5 for PZT-5H) but display
higher acoustic impedances and very large dielectric con-
stants (εS
/ε0 = 1350 for PZT-5H). Current bulk piezo-
electric ceramics also have ﬁnite grain sizes ranging from
1–10 µm, which may be a problem when fabricating very
thin piezoelectric elements.
Lithium niobate (LiNbO3) was selected for this study
because it possesses several material properties that are
ideal for fabricating high-frequency transducers. A brief
list of the pertinent material properties for LiNbO3 ap-
0885–3010/$10.00 c
 2003 IEEE
cannata et al.: single-element ultrasonic transducers for medical imaging 1549
TABLE I
Relevant Material Properties of 36◦ Rotated Y-Cut
Lithium Niobate1
Property Value
Electromechanical coupling coeﬃcient (kt) 0.49
Relative clamped dielectric constant (εS/ε0) 392
Mechanical quality factor (Qm) 10000
Electrical quality factor (QE) 1000
Density (g/cm3) 4.64
Longitudinal wave velocity (m/s) 7340
Acoustic impedance (MRayl) 34.0
Curie temperature (◦C) 1150
1Reported by Boston Piezo-optics, Bellingham, MA.
2From Kino [10].
pears in Table I; it is a single-crystal material that dis-
plays good electromechanical coupling, a low dielectric
constant, and high longitudinal sound speed, ideal for de-
signing sensitive large aperture single-element transducers.
Unfortunately, this material has a high acoustic impedance
and very high electrical and mechanical Q, which makes
it diﬃcult to work with in broadband transducer designs.
Despite the apparent drawbacks of this material, it was
previously shown by our group to provide improved sen-
sitivity and similar bandwidth when compared to devices
made from PVDF, lead titanate, and PZT ﬁber compos-
ite [15]. These results were obtained under the condition
that all transducers were built according to the speciﬁed
designs and that variations in these designs could yield
diﬀerent conclusions.
The goal of this study was to expand upon the previ-
ously reported LiNbO3 transducer design to include de-
vices in the frequency range of 20–80 MHz. An overall de-
sign criterion was to develop devices that display greater
than 50% −6 dB bandwidth and the highest sensitivity
possible. The resulting design as well as the fabrication and
testing of devices produced will be discussed in detail in
this paper. The use of electrical and acoustical impedance
matching to increase the transducer sensitivity and band-
width will be described. The pros and cons of two diﬀerent
transducer focusing techniques will be addressed. Also, im-
ages will be presented of the anterior portion of the human
eye generated by the transducers and the UBM systems
at the University of Southern California and the Cornell
Medical College.
II. Materials and Methods
The following fabrication procedure was used to build
all of the transducers used in this study. The only major
variation in the design was in the technique used to focus
the acoustic beam (Fig. 1). Devices were either focused
with an epoxy lens [Fig. 1(a)] or by spherically shaping
the active element [Fig. 1(b)]. A total of three lens-focused
and three spherically shaped transducers were designed
and fabricated for this study.
Fig. 1. Design cross sections of the lens-focused (a) and press-
focused (b) transducers. The center conductor of the SMA con-
nector was electrically connected to the negative electrode of the
LiNbO3 disk via the conductive epoxy backing. A sputtered layer
of chrome/gold of approximately 1500 Å in thickness was used to
connect the positive side of the LiNbO3 disk to the brass housing
and to electrically shield the entire device.
Several 36◦
rotated Y-cut LiNbO3 (Boston Piezo-optics,
Bellingham, MA) wafers with thicknesses of 90 µm, 60 µm,
and 30 µm were acquired to make transducers operating
at 25 MHz, 50 MHz, and 80 MHz, respectively. The thick-
ness of these piezoelectric elements was reduced to less
than λ/2 in order to compensate for the mass-loading ef-
fects of the acoustic matching and backing layers as well
as the attenuative losses observed during acoustic trans-
mission and reception [17]. These LiNbO3 wafers were elec-
troded by sputtering a chrome/gold layer of approximately
1500 Å in total thickness. A λ/4 silver epoxy matching
layer made from a mixture of three parts 2–3 µm silver
particles (Adrich Chem. Co., Milwaukee, WI) and 1.25
parts Insulcast 501 epoxy (American Safety Technologies,
Roseland, NJ) was cast onto the negative electrode side
with the aid of an adhesion promoter (Chemlok AP-131,
Lord Corp., Erie, PA) [18]. This matching layer was cen-
trifuged at 2000 g for 10 minutes to increase acoustical
impedance and to ensure conductivity over the entire ac-
tive aperture. See Table II for the material properties of
the silver epoxy matching layer as well as the properties of
all other passive materials used in the design. After cur-
ing, the matching layer was lapped down to approximately
λ/4 thickness using a coarse-to-ﬁne grit scheme, with a ﬁ-
nal lapping particle diameter of 12 µm. A very lossy con-
ductive epoxy (E-SOLDER 3022, Von Roll Isola Inc., New
Haven, CT) then was cast on the wafer as the backing
material. A lathe was used to shape the matching, piezo-
electric, and backing layers into the desired acoustic stack
diameter. This fabrication step also served to electrically
isolate the conductive matching and backing layers. The
positive lead wire was secured to the backing layer with
an additional amount of conductive epoxy. A brass hous-
ing was placed concentrically with the acoustic stack, and
an insulating epoxy was poured into the void between the
housing and the device. A layer of chrome/gold then was
1550 ieee transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 50, no. 11, november 2003
TABLE II
Passive Material Properties Used in the Transducer Designs.
Material1 Use ρ (g/cm3) c (m/s) Za (MRayl) Loss (dB/mm)
EPO-TEK 301 Lens/insulating epoxy 1.15 2650 3.05 9.5
E-Solder 3022 Conductive backing 3.20 1850 5.92 110
(centrifuged)
Insulcast 501 and Matching layer 3.86 1900 7.3 13.8
2–3 µm silver particles
Parylene Matching layer 1.18 2200 2.6 N/A
1All materials were characterized at 30 MHz, [19], except for Parylene which was measured at 1 MHz (Onda
Corporation). ρ is the density; c is the longitudinal sound velocity; Za is the acoustic impedance; and Loss
is the attenuation per unit length for a longitudinal sound wave.
Fig. 2. Photographs of ﬁnished press-focused (a) and lens-focused (b)
devices.
sputtered across the transducer face prior to lens focusing
or after press focusing. Final transducers were housed in
modiﬁed SMA connectors (Fig. 2).
A. Lens Focusing
All lens-focused transducers used an epoxy lens (EPO-
TEK 301, Epoxy Tech., Billerica, MA) molded on the
transducer face with a steel ball bearing. The desired focal
length f was achieved by specifying the radius of curvature
of the lens with the following formula [8]:
f ≈
δ
1 − c2/c1
, (1)
where δ is the radius of curvature of the lens, c1 is the
sound velocity in the lens, and c2 is the sound velocity in
the medium. The ball bearing was sprayed with a mold re-
lease agent (Ease Release 200, Mann Formulated Prods.,
Gillete, NJ) to ease in the epoxy post-cure removal process.
The apex of the lens was designed to be approximately λ/4
thick at the center of the transducer face to aid in acous-
tically matching the transducer to the load medium. Eq.
(1) is valid only if the thickness of the lens on the edge of
the active aperture is kept to less than 0.1δ [20]. A large
acoustic path length through the lens at the edge of the
aperture is problematic for high-frequency transducer de-
signs, as the frequency-dependent loss in the lens material
can cause beam apodization as well as a signiﬁcant drop
in device sensitivity. The lens-focused devices created for
this study exhibited a lens edge thickness in the range of
0.11δ to 0.18δ.
B. Press Focusing
The press-focusing technique described by Lockwood et
al. [12] was modiﬁed and used in this study. The trans-
ducer focus was achieved by pressing the active element
into a spherical shape with a steel ball bearing at temper-
atures exceeding 90◦
C. Once the process was ﬁnished, the
device was left to cool to room temperature in the spheri-
cal mold. The LiNbO3 layer did crack during the process,
but the silver epoxy matching layer and epoxy backing en-
sured structural integrity of the acoustic stack. Parylene
was deposited over the entire housing to serve as a sec-
ond acoustic matching layer. Fig. 3 shows an optical mi-
crograph of a typical 80 MHz press-focused transducer in
cross section. The LiNbO3 layer appears to be intact with
a uniform cracking pattern developed. A previous study
by Knapik et al. [16] did show that the press-focusing pro-
cess increases mechanical losses and reduces the electrome-
chanical coupling in the devices produced, although the
reported sensitivity did not appear to be greatly aﬀected.
The eﬀects of the press-focusing technique on a LiNbO3
transducer was analyzed using a nonlinear regression
curve-ﬁtting program based on the Mason equivalent cir-
cuit [21]. The transducer used for this analysis had a 6-
mm aperture, a single silver epoxy matching layer, as well
as the ESOLDER-3022 (von Roll Isola, Inc.) conductive
epoxy backing. This transducer was designed to display
a resonance peak at about 75 MHz in air. Fig. 4 shows
cannata et al.: single-element ultrasonic transducers for medical imaging 1551
Fig. 3. A cross section of an 80-MHz press-focused transducer imaged
by optical micrography courtesy of Onda Corp., Sunnyvale, CA. The
conductive epoxy backing (a), LiNbO3 (b), silver epoxy matching
layer (c), and parylene layer (d) are all visible in the image. The
arrows in the image label the cracks that formed during the press-
focusing process.
the electrical impedance magnitude and phase plots be-
fore [Fig. 4(a)] and after [Fig. 4(b)] the device was press
focused. The curve-ﬁtted results in Table III indicate that
press focusing does degrade the piezoelectric properties of
the LiNbO3 plate. A 3.6% reduction of thickness mode
coupling coeﬃcient, as well as a reduction of approxi-
mately 30% for both the electrical (δE) and mechanical
(δm) loss tangents were observed as a result of this process.
A Krimhotz, Leedom, and Matthaei (KLM) equivalent cir-
cuit model (PiezoCad, Sonic Concepts, Woodinville, WA)
was used to determine the eﬀects of these losses on the
pulse/echo response. The model suggested only a 1.4 dB
reduction in device sensitivity with no changes in device
center frequency, bandwidth, and pulse length.
C. Acoustical Impedance Matching
The performance of a transducer can be signiﬁcantly
improved by incorporating acoustic matching layers into
the design. For wideband transducers, Desilets et al. [22],
showed that a single matching layer should be a λ/4 thick
and of acoustical impedance Zm:
Zm =

Z1Z2
2
1/3
, (2)
where Z1 is the impedance of the piezoelectric element
and Z2 is the impedance of the load medium. For the two
matching layer scheme used in this study, the ideal inner
Zm1 and outer Zm2 matching-layer impedances are calcu-
lated as follows:
Zm1 =

Z4
1 Z3
2
1/7
, (3)
Zm2 =

Z1Z6
2
1/7
. (4)
The theoretical best matching layer impedances for
LiNbO3 with water loading is approximately 8.9 MRayl
for Zm1 and 2.3 MRayl for Zm2. Therefore, the 7.3 MRayl
silver epoxy and 2.6 MRayl parylene layer or the silver
epoxy and 3.1 MRayl EPO-TEK 301 (Epoxy Tech) lens
provide a fairly good match for a broadband transducer
design.
D. Electrical Impedance Matching
The electrical impedance (Ze) of the transducer at reso-
nance is inversely proportional to the clamped capacitance
(C0) of the piezoelectric element by the following relation-
ship:
Ze ∝
1
C0
=
L
εSA
, (5)
whereby L is the thickness and A is the surface area of the
piezoelectric element. In reality the electrical impedance
of the ﬁnished transducer depends on the material prop-
erties of the active element as well as the eﬀect of acous-
tic mass loading by the matching and backing layers [11].
Lithium niobate has a low-clamped dielectric constant
(εS
= 354.3 pF/m) and high-longitudinal sound speed
(c = 7340 m/s), which in combination make this mate-
rial a good match for large aperture high-frequency trans-
ducer design. If needed, electrical circuit elements can be
placed between the transducer and the send/receive elec-
tronics to improve the electrical impedance match. Series
and shunt inductors can be used to cancel the reactive
or imaginary impedance at resonance. A transformer then
can be used to match the remaining device resistance to
the send/receive electronics. A coaxial cable also can pro-
vide an improved impedance match to the electronics [17].
Because a length of coax was required to connect the trans-
ducer to the send/receive electronics, it was deemed the
method of choice for impedance matching for this study.
In order to use a coax as an eﬀective quarter-wavelength
transformer, the values of the transducer impedance (Ze)
and electronics system impedance (Zs) dictate the choice
of cable impedance [23]:
Z0 =

ZeZs (6)
A properly used transmission line can serve to increase
bandwidth and sensitivity as well as provide minor ad-
justments to the center frequency of the transducer. All of
the press-focused transducers were designed to exhibit an
electrical impedance of approximately 12 Ω at resonance
[Fig. 4(b)] so that a λ/4 25 Ω Microdot semirigid coaxial
cable (Communication Concepts Inc., Beavercreek, OH)
would provide a good match to the 50-Ω system electron-
ics despite their larger aperture. The actual cable length
used was 2 m for the 25 MHz transducer, 1 m for the
50 MHz transducer, and 0.6 m for the 80 MHz transducer.
The transformed impedance of the transducer coaxial
cable pair was analyzed using the following relationship
for a transmission line of length x [24]:
Zx = Z0
[Zload + Z0Tanh(γx)]
[Z0 + ZloadTanh(γx)]
, (7)
1552 ieee transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 50, no. 11, november 2003
Fig. 4. Electrical impedance magnitude and phase plots for an air-resonating, 6-mm aperture, 75 MHz, LiNbO3 transducer before (a) and
after press focusing (b). The solid lines are measured values; the dotted lines are the Mason model curve-ﬁtted results.
TABLE III
Piezoelectric Properties of a 6 MM Aperture, 75 MHz, Lithium Niobate Transducer Before and After Press Focusing.1
Property Before Press Focusing After Press Focusing Percent Degradation
Electromechanical coupling coeﬃcient (kt) 0.494 0.476 3.6%
Relative clamped dielectric constant (εS/ε0) 44.0 44.0 0%
Mechanical loss tangent (δm) 0.0418 0.0602 30.5%
Electrical loss tangent (δE) 0.1475 0.2184 32.4%
1All values were determined by ﬁtting a Mason model equivalent circuit to the measured impedance magnitude and
phase.
where Zload represents the electrical impedance of the
transducer and Zx is the transformed coaxial impedance
measured on the system end of the cable, and Z0 and γ are
the characteristic impedance and propagation constant, re-
spectively, of the coaxial cable.
The values for Z0 and γ were obtained by measuring
the complex open and short circuit impedance for a sam-
ple cable on an HP 4194 Impedance Analyzer (Agilent
Technologies, Englewood, CO). A given length x of cable
was prepared for measurement, and the complex, trans-
formed impedance was recorded for both the short circuit
and open circuit Zload values. The two measured values
for Zx and (7) then were used to solve for Z0 and γ. The
distributed network representation for the Microdot cable
(Communication Concepts Inc.) also was solved [25]. The
resultant per unit length values of cable propagation ve-
locity (v), series resistance (r), series inductance (l), shunt
capacitance (c), shunt conductance (g), and attenuation
(α) were recorded and listed in Table IV.
E. Transducer Characterization
All the transducers were tested in a degassed, deion-
ized water bath in pulse/echo mode by reﬂecting the sig-
nal oﬀ an X-cut quartz target placed at the focal point.
For pulse/echo measurements, transducer excitation was
achieved with either a Panametrics (Waltham, MA) model
5900PR pulser/receiver or an Avetech AVB2-TC-C mono-
cycle function generator (Avetech Electrosystems Ltd., Ot-
tawa, Ontario, Canada). A λ/4 cable length was used to
connect the pulser and transducer in all cases. For trans-
ducers that were not electrically matched with a 25-Ω ca-
ble, an appropriate length 50-Ω cable was used. The re-
ﬂected waveforms were received and digitized by a 500-
cannata et al.: single-element ultrasonic transducers for medical imaging 1553
TABLE IV
Measured Properties for the 25 Ω Microdot Coaxial
Cable.1
Property Value
Characteristic impedance (Zo) 22.3 + 0.086i Ω
Propagation constant (γ) 0.084 + 1.62i m−1
Propagation velocity (v) 1.96 × 108 m/s
Inductance/unit length (l) 0.11 µH/m
Resistance/unit length (r) 1.729 Ω/m
Capacitance/unit length (c) 23 pF/m
Conductance/unit length (g) 4.0 mS/m
Attenuation/unit length (α) 0.73 dB/m
1The cable was characterized at 50 MHz. The respective cable pa-
rameters are displayed in the units of meters (m), seconds (s), Ohms
(Ω), Henrys (H), Farads (F), Siemens (S), and decibels (dB).
MHz LC534 Lecroy (Chestnut Ridge, NY) oscilloscope set
to 50-Ω coupling. Further information on the experimen-
tal arrangement using the Panametrics pulser and Avetech
monocycle function generator can be found in Snook et
al. [15], or Lockwood et al. [26]. The insertion loss was
measured using the same approach reported by Sherar
and Foster [14] and, therefore, did not include compen-
sation for losses caused by diﬀraction. Transducer excita-
tion was achieved with multicycle sine wave burst from a
Sony/Tektronix (Beaverton, OR) model AFG2020 func-
tion generator with 50-Ω coupling. The reﬂected wave-
forms were received by the Lecroy oscilloscope in 1-MΩ
coupling mode. The cable length between the function
generator and oscilloscope was 20 cm. The 18% receive
pressure/voltage lost due to transmission into the quartz
crystal was compensated for in the ﬁnal insertion loss cal-
culation. The signal loss due to attenuation in the water
bath also was compensated for using an attenuation of
2.2 × 10−4
dB/mm-MHz2
[12].
The 50-MHz transducers built were used to image the
anterior portion of the human eye by the UBM systems at
the University of Southern California (USC) and the Cor-
nell Medical College. These UBM systems acquire adjacent
A-scan lines to obtain high resolution, two-dimensional im-
age of tissue. The basic design of a UBM system was de-
scribed in Turnbull et al. [4] and will not be repeated here.
These two UBM systems were similar in basic design but
vary in the way that the transducer was scanned across the
specimen. The system at USC used a linear scan, and the
one at the Weill Medical College used an arc-scan to en-
sure that the transducer was always equidistant from the
cornea. The UBM at USC used a logarithmic compres-
sion algorithm to improve image grayscale visualization.
Images were not obtained using higher-frequency devices
due to limitations in the bandwidth of the UBM system
electronics.
III. Results
Several transducers were fabricated with center frequen-
cies in the 20–80 MHz range. Table V shows the mea-
sured results for a group of representative devices. The
receive-echo response and frequency spectra for 50 MHz
and 78 MHz press-focused transducers are shown in Fig. 5,
and the responses for the 45 MHz and 73 MHz lens-focused
transducers are shown in Fig. 6. The −6 dB bandwidths
and two-way insertion loss values ranged from 57 to 74%
and 9.6 to 21.3 dB, respectively. An image of an excised
human eye was generated with the 45 MHz lens-focused
device and the UBM system at USC (Fig. 7). An in vivo
image of a human eye generated with the 50 MHz press-
focused transducer and the UBM system at Cornell Med-
ical College is shown in Fig. 8. The entire anterior portion
of the eye is visible as a result of the arc-scanning motor
system used.
IV. Discussion and Conclusions
This study has shown that a low-loss piezoelectric ma-
terial such as LiNbO3 can be used to make highly sensitive
broadband ultrasonic transducers in the 20–80 MHz range.
Both transducer focusing techniques yielded transducers
displaying excellent sensitivity, which is essential for very
high-frequency imaging of highly attenuative tissues such
as human skin.
On average, the lens-focused transducers provided
higher bandwidth levels and lower sensitivity when com-
pared to the press-focused devices. This is most likely due
to the varying thickness of the lens that caused an in-
creasing gradient of attenuative losses from the center to
the edges of the active area. Additionally, manufacturing
ﬂaws such as lens surface roughness and microbubbles in
the cured epoxy also could have contributed to the in-
creased losses observed with this focusing technique. In
contrast, the press-focused transducer design proved to
produce more sensitive devices despite the reported in-
creases in electrical and mechanical losses and the degra-
dation of electromechanical coupling. These devices dis-
played at least a 6 dB decrease in measured insertion loss
when compared to a similar lens-focused device. The press-
focused transducer design also was used to produce devices
with lower f#’s due to limitations in the lens-focused de-
sign pertaining to lens edge thickness.
The press-focusing technique proved to be a quicker,
less problematic way of focusing the transducer beam. The
lens-focusing procedure required several hours of prepara-
tion and 1 day of cure time to complete. In contrast, the
press-focusing technique could be performed in less than 6
hours per device, including the Parylene deposition time.
Additionally, many lens-focused transducers were not used
because of bubble formation over the active element. The
failures due to the press-focusing process were less frequent
and occurred mostly as a result of an electrical short devel-
oped through the formed cracks in the LiNbO3 layer. And,
the deposition of the Parylene matching layer was found
to be a repeatable process that was accurately controlled
by the weight of Parylene dimer used. This process was
less susceptible to manufacturing error when compared to
the lens-casting technique used. Overall the press-focusing
technique seemed to be more suitable for high-frequency
transducer manufacturing.
1554 ieee transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 50, no. 11, november 2003
Fig. 5. Time-domain pulse/echo response (a) and normalized frequency spectrum (b) for the 50-MHz (above) and 78-MHz (below) press-
focused transducers.
Fig. 6. Time-domain pulse/echo response (a) and normalized frequency spectrum (b) for the 45-MHz (above) and 73-MHz (below) lens-
focused transducers.
cannata et al.: single-element ultrasonic transducers for medical imaging 1555
TABLE V
Measured Transducer Performance.
Center Frequency (MHz) Focusing Technique Aperture (mm) f# BW (%)1 IL (dB) PL (ns)
222 lens 10 3.1 72 19.5 145
232 spherical shaping 12 3 60 13.4 140
452 lens 3.0 2.9 74 21.3 56
50 spherical shaping 6.0 2.0 60 9.6 54
73 lens 1.8 3.1 57 20.3 40
78 spherical shaping 3.0 2.0 73 13.5 36
1BW is the −6 dB bandwidth; IL is the insertion loss; and PL is the 20-dB pulse length in nanoseconds.
2Tested with Panametrics 5900 PR.
Fig. 7. A UBM image of the anterior portion of an excised human eye.
The 40-MHz lens-focused transducer was used to form this image.
The RF data used to form this image was logarithmically compressed
to a 70-dB dynamic range in order to improve the image speckle
pattern.
Fig. 8. A wide-angle view of a normal anterior human eye segment
taken in vivo. The UBM system at Cornell Medical College and the
50-MHz press-focused transducer were used to form this image.
The images of human eyes obtained in vivo and ex vivo
displayed excellent signal-to-noise ratio and penetration
depth. The logarithmic compression algorithm used in the
UBM system at USC demonstrated that the highly sen-
sitive transducers developed for this study could be used
to increase image contrast without signiﬁcantly raising the
noise ﬂoor. Further development of this transducer design
could produce devices operating at frequencies higher than
80 MHz with similar results in device bandwidth and sen-
sitivity.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge Gene Gerber for
his aid with the transducer fabrication process.
References
[1] G. R. Lockwood, D. H. Turnbull, D. A. Christopher, and F. S.
Foster, “Beyond 30 MHz: Applications of high frequency ultra-
sonic imaging,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol., vol. 15, pp. 60–71, 1996.
[2] F. S. Foster, C. J. Pavlin, G. R. Lockwood, L. K. Ryan, K. A.
Harasiewicz, L. Berube, and A. M. Rauth, “Principles and ap-
plications of ultrasonic backscatter microscopy,” IEEE Trans.
Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr., vol. 40, pp. 608–616, 1993.
[3] R. H. Silverman, F. L. Lizzi, B. G. Ursea, L. Cozzarelli, J. A.
Ketterling, C. X. Deng, R. Folberg, and D. J. Colemen, “Safety
levels for exposure of cornea and lens to very high-frequency
ultrasound,” J. Ultras. Med., vol. 20, pp. 979–986, 2001.
[4] D. Turnbull, B. G. Starkoski, K. A. Harasiewicz, J. L. Sem-
ple, L. From, A. K. Gupta, D. N. Sauder, and F. S. Foster, “A
40–100 MHz B-scan ultrasound backscatter microscope for skin
imaging,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 21, pp. 79–88, 1995.
[5] C. Passman and H. Ermert, “A 100 MHz ultrasound imaging
system for dermatologic and ophthalmologic diagnostics,” IEEE
Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr., vol. 43, no. 4, pp.
545–552, 1996.
[6] D. H. Turnbull, “In utero ultrasound backscatter microscopy of
early stage mouse embryos,” Comput. Med. Imaging Graph., vol.
23, no. 1, pp. 25–31, 1999.
[7] F. S. Foster, M. Y. Zhang, Y. Q. Zhou, G. Liu, J. Mehi, E.
Cherin, K. A. Harasiewicz, B. G. Starkoski, L. Zan, D. A.
Knapik, and S. L. Adamson, “A new ultrasound instrument for
in vivo microimaging of mice,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 28,
no. 9, pp. 1165–1172, 2002.
[8] K. K. Shung, M. B. Smith, and B. Tsui, Principles of Medical
Imaging. New York: Academic, 1992, pp. 78–161.
[9] F. S. Foster, C. J. Pavlin, K. A. Harasiewicz, D. A. Christopher,
and D. H. Turnbull, “Advances in ultrasound microscopy,” Ul-
trasound Med. Biol., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1–27, 2000.
[10] G. S. Kino, Acoustic Waves: Devices, Imaging, and Analog Sig-
nal Processing. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1987, pp.
27–71.
1556 ieee transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 50, no. 11, november 2003
[11] K. K. Shung and M. J. Zipparo, “Ultrasonic transducers and
arrays,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol., vol. 15, pp. 20–30, 1996.
[12] G. R. Lockwood, D. H. Turnbull, and F. S. Foster, “Fabrication
of high frequency spherically shaped ceramic transducers,” IEEE
Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr., vol. 41, pp. 231–235,
1994.
[13] M. J. Zipparo, K. K. Shung, and T. R. Shrout, “Piezoceramics
for high-frequency (20–100 MHz) single-element imaging trans-
ducers,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr., vol.
44, pp. 1038–1048, 1997.
[14] M. D. Sherar and F. S. Foster, “The design and fabrication of
high frequency poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) transducers,” Ultrason.
Imag., vol. 11, pp. 75–94, 1989.
[15] K. A. Snook, J.-Z. Zhao, C. H. Alves, J. M. Cannata, W.-
H. Chen, R. J. Meyer, Jr., T. A. Ritter, and K. Kirk Shung,
“Design, fabrication, and evaluation of high frequency, single-
element transducers incorporating diﬀerent materials,” IEEE
Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr., vol. 49, no. 2, pp.
169–176, 2002.
[16] D. A. Knapik, B. Starkoski, C. J. Palvin, and F. S. Foster, “A
100–200 MHz ultrasound biomicroscope,” IEEE Trans. Ultra-
son., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr., vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 1540–1549,
2000.
[17] R. E. McKeighen, “Design guidelines for medical ultrasonic ar-
rays,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 3341, pp. 2–18, May 1998.
[18] T. A. Ritter, T. R. Shrout, T. Tutwiler, and K. K. Shung, “A
30-MHz composite ultrasound array for medical imaging appli-
cations,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr., vol.
49, no. 2, pp. 217–230, 2002.
[19] H. Wang, T. A. Ritter, W. Cao, and K. K. Shung, “High fre-
quency properties of passive materials for ultrasonic transduc-
ers,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr., vol. 48,
no. 1, pp. 78–84, 2001.
[20] P. N. T. Wells, Biomedical Ultrasonics. New York: Academic,
1977.
[21] T. A. Ritter, K. K. Shung, W. Cao, and T. R. Shrout, “Elec-
tromechanical properties of thin strip piezoelectric vibrators at
high frequency,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 88, no. 1, pp. 394–397, 2000.
[22] C. S. Desilets, J. D. Fraser, and G. S. Kino, “The design of eﬃ-
cient broad-band piezoelectric transducers,” IEEE Trans. Son-
ics Ultrason., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 115–125, 1978.
[23] P. Horowitz and W. Hill, The Art of Electronics. New York:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1989, pp. 879–882.
[24] A. P. Albrecht, “Transmission lines,” in Electronic Designer’s
Handbook. L. J. Giacoletto, Ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977,
pp. 8.1–8.78.
[25] T. A. Ritter, “Design, fabrication and testing of high frequency
(>20 MHz) composite ultrasound imaging arrays,” Ph.D. disser-
tation, University Park, PA: Penn State University, Aug. 2000.
[26] G. R. Lockwood, J. W. Hunt, and F. S. Foster, “The design of
protection circuitry for high-frequency ultrasound imaging sys-
tems,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr., vol. 38,
no. 1, pp. 48–55, 1991.
Jonathan M. Cannata was born in Car-
son, CA, on August 4, 1975. He received his
B.S. degree in Bioengineering from the Uni-
versity of California at San Diego in 1998,
and his M.S. degree in Bioengineering from
the Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA, in 2000. Mr. Cannata is currently
pursuing a doctorate degree in Bioengineer-
ing at the Pennsylvania State University un-
der the guidance of Dr. K. Kirk Shung.
His current research interests include the
design, modeling, and fabrication of high-
frequency, single-element ultrasonic transducers and arrays for med-
ical imaging applications. He also currently serves as the engineer-
ing manager of the NIH Resource on Medical Ultrasonic Transducer
Technology at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
CA.
He is a student member of the IEEE.
Timothy A. Ritter was born in Harris-
burg, PA, on February 19, 1965. He earned his
B.S. degree in mechanical engineering from
Penn State University, University Park, PA,
in 1987, his M.S. degree in physics from
the University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, in
1991, and his Ph.D. degree in bioengineering
from Penn State University in 2000.
From 1998 until 2001 he served as manager
of the NIH Resource on Medical Ultrasonic
Transducer Technology, University Park, PA.
In 2000 he was appointed an assistant profes-
sor of bioengineering at Penn State. He accepted a commission in the
U.S. Air Force in 2001 and was assigned to Keesler Air Force Base,
Biloxi, MS, following completion of Oﬃcer Training School. His cur-
rent assignment is in therapeutic and diagnostic medical physics.
He is a member of the American Association of Physicists in
Medicine and the Health Physics Society.
Wo-Hsing Chen currently works as an en-
gineer for Focus Surgery in Indianapolis, IN.
He received the B.S. degree in biomedical en-
gineering from Chung-Yuan Christian Univer-
sity in Chung-Li, Taiwan in 1991, and the
M.S. degree in medical engineering from the
George Washington University, Washington,
DC, in 1995 and Ph.D. degree from Pennsyl-
vania State University, University Park, PA,
in 2002.
Ronald H. Silverman, Ph.D., received an
M.S. degree in bioengineering from the Poly-
technic Institute of New York, Troy, NY, in
1979 and a doctorate in computer science
from Polytechnic University, New York, NY,
in 1990.
Dr. Silverman is currently Research Direc-
tor of the Bioacoustic Research Facility of the
Department of Ophthalmology of the Weill
Medical College of Cornell University in New
York City. He holds the academic title of Pro-
fessor of Computer Science in Ophthalmology.
He has been involved with ultrasound research in ophthalmology
since 1982, and he has performed research in diverse areas within this
specialty, including bioeﬀects, high-intensity ultrasound, tissue char-
acterization, high-frequency imaging, microvascular ﬂow imaging,
and pattern recognition. Current projects include noninvasive ultra-
sound characterization of metastatic potential in ocular melanoma,
high-resolution evaluation of ﬂow in the ciliary body, biometric anal-
ysis of the cornea in refractive surgery, and high-resolution imaging
of the retina.
K. Kirk Shung (S’73–M’75–SM’89–F’93)
obtained a B.S. degree in electrical engineer-
ing from Cheng-Kung University in Tainan,
Taiwan in 1968, an M.S. degree in electri-
cal engineering from University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO, in 1970, and a Ph.D. degree
in electrical engineering from University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, in 1975. He did
postdoctoral research at Providence Medical
Center in Seattle, WA, for 1 year before be-
ing appointed a research bioengineer holding a
joint appointment at the Institute of Applied
Physiology and Medicine, Seattle, WA. He became an assistant pro-
fessor at the Bioengineering Program, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA, in 1979 and was promoted to professor in 1989.
cannata et al.: single-element ultrasonic transducers for medical imaging 1557
He was a Distinguished Professor of Bioengineering at Penn State
until September 1, 2002 when he joined the Department of Biomedi-
cal Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA,
as a professor. He has been the director of NIH Resource on Medical
Ultrasonic Transducer Technology in University Park, PA and Los
Angeles, CA since 1997.
Dr. Shung is a fellow of the IEEE, the Acoustical Society of Amer-
ica, and the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine. He is a
founding Fellow of the American Institute of Medical and Biological
Engineering. He has served for two terms as a member of the NIH
Diagnostic Radiology Study Section. He received the IEEE Engineer-
ing in Medicine and Biology Society early career award in 1985 and
coauthored a best paper published in IEEE Transactions on UFFC in
2000. He is the distinguished lecturer for the IEEE UFFC society for
2002–2003. He was elected an outstanding alumnus of Cheng-Kung
University in 2001.
He has published more than 160 papers and book chapters. Dr.
Shung is the author of a textbook Principles of Medical Imaging,
published by Academic Press in 1992. He co-edited a book Ultra-
sonic Scattering by Biological Tissues, published by CRC Press in
1993. Dr. Shung’s research interest is in ultrasonic transducers, high-
frequency ultrasonic imaging, and ultrasonic scattering in tissues.
