DEPLOYMENT GOALS
Our Smartphone-enabled probes are
based on USB ultrasound probes
currently sold for use with laptops and
desktops running Windows XP or Vista,
so volume production of Smartphone-
enabled probes could begin in a few
months. The DLLs and driver required
for application development will be
placed in the public domain so
developers can integrate ultrasound
into their Smartphone-based medical
applications.
Smart Phone-Compatible USB Ultrasound Probe
http://ultrasound.engineering.wustl.edu/index.php/Cell_Phone_SDK
Washington University in St. Louis
William D. Richard and David M. Zar
PROJECT RESULTS
We have developed a low-power, low-cost
ultrasound probe that runs on Windows
Mobile Smartphones. The probe can
connect directly to, and be powered by,
the Smartphone or connect through the
Fone+ base. This technology can give
people in many remote or poor regions
access to ultrasound, a valuable tool in
diagnosing numerous diseases and
medical conditions, as well as enable new
applications of medical ultrasound.
On Left – two sides of the circuit board
On Right – USB-based ultrasound probe
Portable, Affordable
Ultrasound
+
Screen from the Fone+ video output
showing the basic user interface.
ENABLING BETTER HEALTHCARE EVERYWHERE
• First responders have small, portable ultrasound probes
they use with their cell phones to see, instantly, if the
bullet/shrapnel is near an artery or nerve.
• Nurses, with ultrasound probes in their pockets, use their
cell phones to start IVs or central lines or to check the
bladder volume of a patient with a catheter.
• Patients with drug delivery implants can be shown how
to image themselves to determine if their implant has
caused an infection or cyst or moved too far. A baseline
image can be compared to successive images taken by
the patient, every month, in their own home with their
own cell phone. With some image analysis, most people
could be told, by the software, that they don’t need to
have their implant checked at the clinic that month. If
there is a problem, the data are sent, automatically, to a
physician for analysis; The patient alerted only if there is
a problem.
• Patient data and images can be combined and posted to
PHR or HER systems, automatically. No more lost exam
data, and the patient would be in control of that data.
BRINGING MEDICAL IMAGING TECHNOLOGY TO
POOR AND REMOTE COMMUNITIES
Medical imaging is used extensively in modern healthcare.
Yet, 70% of the World’s population do not have access to
any type of medical imaging. We desire to bring low-cost,
portable, and easy-to-use medical ultrasound imaging to
everyone, including:
• Rural China, where it may take three days to get to a
hospital, but where cell phones and televisions are
pervasive.
• India, where cell phones are becoming popular in rural
areas, and where cell phone companies are actively
pursuing the enormous market.
• Brazil, where approximately 25% of the population live in
small communities of under 20,000 people.
• Indonesia, where over half the people still live without
electricity, but where cell phones are gaining in
popularity and where there has been tremendous
investment in cell phone coverage since 2001.
2009
