Feasibility of ultra-cheap imaging: designing ultrasound for the developing world
Emily Kwan1-4, Charles F. Caskey PhD2-4
1University of Rochester Department of Biomedical Engineering, 2Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 3Vanderbilt University Institute
for Imaging Science, 4Vanderbilt University Department of Biomedical Engineering
Introduction
Since its clinical implementation in the 1970s, ultrasound has
become a critical form of medical imaging with many purposes
from detecting problems in pregnancy to quickly assessing
trauma situations. While most developed countries have
extensive access to forms of medical imaging, developing
countries often lack these devices. When introduced in low
resource countries and regions, ultrasound imaging had a
significant effect on the clinical diagnosis and influenced the
course of treatment for patients [1]. However, ultrasound
systems are costly (~$50k US) and only recently more portable.
The initial goal of this project was to determine feasibility of a
portable ultrasound device that is both cost efficient (~$300 US)
and capable of producing medically relevant images.
Additionally, due to sampling hardware limitations, it was
necessary to simulate a demodulation circuit, allowing for a
lower sampling rate. Through building a working ultrasound
system, the results show that further developments in cheap
medical ultrasound would be both worthwhile and attainable.
Ultrasound Components
Mechanical Scanner
In the initial design (see TABLE), the Zaber Linear Actuator
moved the transducer. This was replaced with an Arduino that
communicates with a commodity grade servo motor.
Transducer
For ease of setup, two spherical focused Valpey Fisher
Immersion Transducers were used with center frequencies at
5 MHz and 2.25 MHz
Pulser-Receiver:
Specific components of Pulser-Receiver:
• High-Voltage (HV) Pulser
• Pulse Repetition Frequency (PRF)
• Transmit Receive (T/R) Switch
• Amplifier
The Panametrics 500PR was used to allow for a consistent and
reliable signal.
Analog to Digital (A/D) Converter & Image Processing
Software
Computer & Display
A standard Personal Computer and Monitor were used to run
and display the various operating systems and image
processing software.
Demodulation Circuit Simulation
With the maximum sampling rate of the BitScope at 10 MHz, the signal from the 5 MHz transducer
encounters aliasing. The demodulation circuit would be a hardware component that occurs after the
Pulser-Receiver, while the signal is analog. It would maintain the signal while reducing the required
sampling frequency to the bandwidth of the signal. Without this modulation, the sampling frequency
must be double the highest frequency present in the signal. With the assumption that the signal’s
bandwidth is equivalent to the transducer’s center frequency, this lowers the required sampling rates.
Frequency (MHz)
The ultrasound design forms B-Mode/2D images by
translating a single transducer across the desired plane.
The single element system is shown in Figure 1.
At each angle, the software processes at least ten
digitally captured echoes then reconstructs an image
using a standard sequence of digital filtering,
demodulation, and time gain compensation.
Images were taken of a cylindrical phantom with water-
filled cyst-like features that was made in-house (Figure
6), as well as a commercial imaging phantom (Figure 7).
Data Acquisition Methods
Figure 4: Frequency spectrum of signal in
demodulation simulation and reconstruction
A-G correspond to signals in Figure 2 and 3.
Results
Component
Initial Current Future
Specific Part Cost Specific Part Cost Specific Part Cost
Mechanical Scanner Zaber Linear Actuator $2,000 Servo and Arduino $30 Potentiometer and Arduino $15
Transducer Valpey Fischer $300 Valpey Fischer $300 DIY Transducer $30
Pulser Receiver Panametrics 500PR $1,000 Panametrics 500PR $1,000
PRF using Arduino $0
HV Pulser Circuit $25
T/R Switch Circuit
$10
Amp Circuit
A/D Converter GaGeScope $10,000 BitScope $150 BitScope $150
Image Processing Software (Windows) Matlab $1,000 (Linux) Python $0 (Raspberry Pi) Python $0
Computer PC $1,000 PC $1,000 Raspberry Pi $40
Display Monitor $50 Monitor $50 Monitor $50
Other Demodulation Circuit $10
Total $15,350 Total $2,530 Total $330
Figure 1: Single Element Image
Acquisition Setup
A servo motor rotates the transducer
about the Red “X”, collecting echoes
at 1° increments across a 60°
sweep. The system collects the
echoes of the red and blue regions
combined. Because of signal noise
in transducer near field, only the
blue region goes through image
processing. In this setup, the depth
of acquisition for the transducer is
between 6-7 cm.
60°
Depth
Transducer
A/D Converter
Max Sampling
Rate
Software
Operating
System
GaGeScope 100 MHz MATLAB Windows OS
BitScope 10 MHz Python Linux/Ubuntu
Figure 5: Block Diagrams
Block Diagrams of (A) current ultrasound system and (B)
system to acquire data for the demodulation simulation. Blue
boxes indicate low-cost, commodity grade electronic devices.
A
B
Frequency (MHz)
Frequency (MHz)
Frequency (MHz)
Frequency (MHz)
Frequency (MHz)
Frequency (MHz)
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Figure 6: “Cyst” Phantom
Two photos of the cylindrical water-
filled phantom made in-house.
A
Figure 7: CIRS Multi-Purpose Multi-Tissue
Ultrasound Phantom (Model 040GSE)
(A) Entire phantom
(B) Diagram of imaged section
B
To digitally simulate this circuit, datasets were acquired
using the schematic in Figure 5B at 100 MHz, representing
the analog signal. First, the signal is bandpass filtered to
remove noise at non-contributing frequencies; this is the
Original RF data, labeled as A. Processed in Python, the
signal is demodulated and reconstructed following the
block diagrams in Figure 2 and Figure 3, respectively [2].
The reconstructed signal is G.
exp(-i2πFt)
Down Mixing
A B LP Filter C Decimation
Down-Sampling
D
Up-Sampling
D E
exp(i2πFt)
G
Zero
Padding LP Filter
Up Mixing
F
Figure 2: Block diagram of demodulation
In the down-sampling step, every 10th sample is kept, the rest is
discarded. This replicates the 10 MHz sampling of the BitScope Micro.
Figure 3: Block Diagram of reconstruction
In the up-sampling back to 100 MHz, 9 zeros are added between each
sample, causing the replicas in the frequency spectrum (FIGURE# E).
Conclusions
Acknowledgements
References
[1] Sippel et al.: Review article: Use of ultrasound in the developing world. International
Journal of Emergency Medicine 2011 4:72.
[2] Johan Kirkhorn, Introduction to IQ-demodulation of RF data. Sept. 1999.
Thanks to the Caskey Lab at the Vanderbilt University Institute of
Imaging Science and Brett Byram for use of the CIRS Phantom.
Research supported by
Vanderbilt Radiology Startup
School of Engineering Dean’s Award
Table 1. Cost breakdown of ultrasound component parts for Initial, Current, and Future designs.
Figure 8: Ultrasound images
A-C: Images of “Cyst” Phantom, D-E: Images of CIRS Phantom
(A) Acquired with BitScope with 2.25 MHz transducer. This transducer was
not optimal for the ultrasound system.
(B) Acquired with BitScope with 5 MHz transducer
(C-D) Image from demodulation circuit simulation with 5 MHz transducer
(E) Comparison between combined, acquired images and phantom diagram
A B C
• The current ultrasound system produces medically relevant images
• The simulation suggests that a hardware demodulation circuit would improve the
quality of images collected through the low cost A/D converter, the BitScope Micro
• The cost can be further reduced to reach the goal of $300 by:
• replacing the commercial pulser-receiver with an integrated circuit-based
analog front-end of the pulser-receiver components
• Building transducers in-house
• Implementing image reconstruction on a Raspberry Pi
D
E
BitScope
Micro
