ieee transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 49, no. 2, february 2002 169
Design, Fabrication, and Evaluation of High
Frequency, Single-Element Transducers
Incorporating Diﬀerent Materials
Kevin A. Snook, Jian-Zhong Zhao, Carlos H. F. Alves, Associate Member, IEEE, Jonathan M. Cannata,
Wo-Hsing Chen, Richard J. Meyer, Jr., Timothy A. Ritter, Associate Member, IEEE,
and K. Kirk Shung, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—The performance of high frequency, single-
element transducers depends greatly on the mechanical
and electrical properties of the piezoelectric materials used.
This study compares the design and performance of trans-
ducers incorporating diﬀerent materials. The materials in-
vestigated include 1-3 lead zirconate titanate (PZT) ﬁber
composite, lead titanate (PbTiO3) ceramic, poly(vinylidene
ﬂuoride) (PVDF) ﬁlm, and lithium niobate (LiNbO3) sin-
gle crystal. All transducers were constructed with a 3-mm
aperture size and an f-number between 2 and 3. Backing and
matching materials were selected based on design goals and
fabrication limitations. A simpliﬁed coaxial cable tuning
method was employed to match the transducer impedance
to 50 Ω for the PZT ﬁber composite and PbTiO3 ceramic
transducers. Transducers were tested for two-way loss and
;6 dB bandwidth using the pulse/echo response from a ﬂat
quartz target. Two-way loss varied from 21 to 46 dB, and
bandwidths measured were in the range from 47 to 118%.
In vitro ultrasonic backscatter microscope (UBM) images
of an excised human eye were obtained for each device and
used to compare imaging performance. Both press-focusing
and application of a lens proved to be useful beam focus-
ing methods for high frequency. Under equal gain schemes,
the LiNbO3 and PbTiO3 transducers provided better image
contrast than the other materials.
I. Introduction
High frequency (30 to 150 MHz) transducers are
needed for ultrasonic imaging of the eye, skin, blood
vessels, and small animals [1], [2]. The selection of an ap-
propriate piezoelectric material in the design and fabri-
cation of high frequency transducers is of paramount im-
portance [3], [4]. Frequently used piezoelectric materials
include piezoelectric polymers [5], LiNbO3 crystals [6],
PbTiO3 ceramics [4], PZT ceramics [4], and ZnO ﬁlms
[7]. Each material mentioned has its own advantages and
disadvantages. Piezoelectric polymers possess a low acous-
tic impedance (∼4 Mrayl), which is similar to human tis-
Manuscript received February 28, 2000; accepted August 28, 2001.
This work has been supported by NIH Grant #P41-RR11795.
K. A. Snook, J.-Z. Zhao, J. M. Cannata, W.-H. Chen, T. A. Rit-
ter, and K. K. Shung are with NIH Resource on Medical Ultra-
sonic Transducer Technology, Department of Bioengineering, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802 (e-mail:
kas412@psu.edu).
C. H. F. Alves is with Federal Center of Technological Education,
CEFET/RJ, Bolsista CAPES, Brazil.
R. J. Meyer, Jr. is with Materials Research Laboratory, The Penn-
sylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802.
sues, and a low dielectric constant, but suﬀer from low
electromechanical coupling (kt < 0.3). Conversely, PZT
ceramics have high electromechanical coupling, but their
relatively high dielectric constants cause a severe electrical
impedance mismatch to the typical 50-Ω load of electronic
instruments.
Fine scale, 1-3 oriented PZT ﬁber piezo-composite is a
recent development that provides a novel piezoelectric ma-
terial [8], [9]. They have high electromechanical coupling
in the thickness mode that approaches the k33 of the piezo-
ceramic in the composite. Furthermore, their acoustic and
electrical impedances can be adjusted over a broad range.
A 40-MHz transducer with an aperture size of 2 mm dis-
played a bandwidth of 54% and 47-dB two-way loss [8], [9].
As discussed previously, the transducers’ performances
vary greatly depending on the piezoelectric material. At
high frequencies, fabrication methods and passive mate-
rial properties also greatly aﬀect overall transducer per-
formance. The objectives of this study are to improve the
sensitivity and bandwidth of these devices while maintain-
ing the aperture size, compare transducers that use similar
fabrication methods, and discuss design and fabrication
limitations that aﬀect sensitivity and bandwidth.
Four materials were chosen to represent the range of
piezoelectric materials used in transducer applications; the
ﬁber composite was selected as a typical ceramic/polymer
composite, PVDF as a typical piezo-polymer, LiNbO3 as
a typical piezo-crystal, and PbTiO3 as a typical piezo-
ceramic. PbTiO3 was chosen as the ceramic because it
has coupling similar to that of PZT without the detriment
of the large dielectric constant; better electrical matching
makes it more conducive to single-element design. A fre-
quency of 50 MHz was chosen as the center frequency for
all of the transducers because transducers at this frequency
can satisfy a wide range of imaging requirements for eye,
skin, blood vessels, and small animals. Performance results
including insertion loss (which is a measure of the sensitiv-
ity [5]), bandwidth, and a comparison of images acquired
by a high frequency UBM will be reported. It is hoped
that these results will provide useful design information
for transducer engineers and investigators.
0885–3010/$10.00 c
 2002 IEEE
170 ieee transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 49, no. 2, february 2002
II. Materials and Methods
All of the transducers were designed with a 3-mm diam-
eter and an f-number between 2 and 3. This low f-number
results in improved lateral resolution but maintains a rea-
sonable focal distance. The thickness of the materials was
less than the required λ/2 because it has been demon-
strated that the center frequency will be down-shifted by
the load of backing and matching [10] as well as electrodes.
One-dimensional modeling has shown that near 50 MHz, a
thick electrode can noticeably alter the shape of the wave-
form because of its ﬁnite thickness relative to a wavelength
and mass-loading eﬀect.
To compare the diﬀerent piezoelectric materials, one
goal was to attempt to keep the fabrication speciﬁcations,
i.e., backing, matching, and focusing schemes, as uniform
as possible. Another goal was to fabricate the transducers
with greater than 40% bandwidth, maximum sensitivity,
and tractable fabrication schemes. Because of the diﬀerent
material properties and mechanical characteristics of the
piezoelectrics, it was a challenge to satisfy every goal. Each
material was subject to diﬀerent fabrication issues; thus,
in designing these devices, there was a level of trade-oﬀ be-
tween optimized design and feasibility of manufacturing.
The 1-3 ﬁber composite used in this paper consisted
of 45% ﬁber volume fraction with 17-µm diameter ﬁbers
[8], [9]. The electromechanical properties of the composite
are listed in Table I. The backing was made using EPO-
TEK 301 epoxy (Epoxy Tech. Inc., Billerica, MA) mixed
with silver-coated microspheres (PQ Corp., Valley Forge,
PA), which yielded a low acoustic impedance (∼1 Mrayl)
and maximum sensitivity [11]. The matching layer was a
vapor-deposited parylene ﬁlm with an acoustic impedance
of 3.0 Mrayl. For a 50-MHz transducer with an aperture
size of 3 mm, the relative dielectric constant (εs
/ε0) of 200
resulted in a low electrical impedance, which was <5 Ω
near the center frequency. To impedance match to the 50-
Ω electronics, a 1:9 impedance ratio transformer was con-
nected in series with an open-circuited, 15-cm long coax
cable. This tuning raised the impedance at 50 MHz to 40 Ω
as listed in Table II. Focusing was achieved by spherically
shaping the material as described by Lockwood et al. [12].
The PVDF was purchased from Ktech Corp. (Albu-
querque, NM), and its properties are also listed in Ta-
ble I. It has the lowest acoustic impedance (3.89 MRayl),
large mechanical losses, and the highest electrical losses
of all of the piezoelectric materials studied. This trans-
ducer was designed using unloaded EPO-TEK 301 epoxy,
which has an impedance of 3.15 MRayl [13], as the back-
ing. This was the lowest feasible acoustic impedance back-
ing, because the spheres in the microsphere-loaded backing
reduced the quality of the output waveform when press-
focused with the PVDF. This eﬀect was due to the pack-
ing of the spheres; the PVDF was only attached at certain
points across the front face of the backing. In between
these points, the PVDF did not conform to the spherical
shape of the press-focusing, and the pressure waveform be-
came distorted, resulting in loss of signal amplitude and
bandwidth. No acoustic matching layer was used because
of the polymer’s intrinsically low acoustic impedance.
The LiNbO3 crystal with 36◦
-rotated Y-cut was pro-
cured from Boston Piezo-optics Inc. (Medway, MA). Com-
pared with other piezoelectric materials, the most valu-
able feature of the LiNbO3 crystal is that this material
simultaneously possesses a high electromechanical cou-
pling coeﬃcient and a low dielectric constant, as listed
in the Table I. This feature makes it possible to build a
high sensitivity device without electrical tuning. Details
of the acoustic design are listed in Table II. The acous-
tic impedance mismatch between the crystal and tissue
was overcome by using two materials as matching layers.
The ﬁrst layer, a 7.3-MRayl [14], [15] quarter-wavelength
matching layer, was fabricated by centrifuging a mixture of
Insulcast 501 epoxy (Insulcast, Roseland, NJ) and ﬁne size
(2 to 3.5 µm) silver powder (Aldrich Chem. Co., Milwau-
kee, WI). A lens fabricated from an unloaded epoxy (EPO-
TEK 301) was used to focus the beam and to provide a
second impedance step. Centrifuged conductive epoxy (E-
SOLDER 3022, Von Roll Isola Inc., New Haven, CT) with
an impedance of 5.9 MRayl [13] was used as the backing.
LiNbO3 is a large Q material and, therefore, has an in-
trinsically narrow bandwidth. This moderate impedance
backing enhanced the overall device bandwidth but did
not result in a severe degradation in sensitivity.
The PbTiO3 (EC 97) was obtained from Edo Corp.
(Salt Lake City, UT) and was hot isostatically pressed at
the Materials Research Laboratory at Penn State Univer-
sity to increase the density and eliminate pores in the ce-
ramic. As indicated in Table I, the PbTiO3 ceramic has as
high an electromechanical coupling coeﬃcient as LiNbO3
crystal; however, it displays a high relative dielectric con-
stant and requires electrical tuning to improve the per-
formance. As summarized in Table II, the PbTiO3 device
used the same backing as LiNbO3, because it also has a
relatively large Q, and focusing was achieved by spheri-
cal press-focusing the material. To simplify the process of
spherical shaping and avoid complexity in matching layer
fabrication, a single matching layer was used, consisting
of a quarter-wavelength thick parylene ﬁlm that was de-
posited after press-focusing.
A modiﬁed tuning technique was employed in this work.
It is derived from the concept that the impedance of a
transmission line changes continuously from capacitive to
inductive in half-wavelength periods if the end is electri-
cally open. Therefore, the coaxial cable can be used as a
reactive tuning element with capacitive or inductive prop-
erties depending on the cable length. Combined with trans-
formers, the coaxial transmission cable can be used to tune
high frequency (>40 MHz) transducers, yielding a bet-
ter electrical impedance match to 50-Ω electronics. Fig. 1
shows the electrical impedance of a 45-MHz PbTiO3 trans-
ducer before and after the electrical tuning via a trans-
former (T9-1-KK81; Mini-Circuits, Brooklyn, NY) and a
16-cm long coaxial cable (BELDEN, 9239 low noise coax,
Richmond, IN). As shown in the Fig. 1(a), the impedance
at 45 MHz was only 5.3 Ω without the tuning, but was
snook et al.: high frequency, single-element transducers 171
TABLE I
Piezoelectric Material Parameters.
Material kt εs/ε0 ρ(g/cm3) c (m/s) Qm QE Za (MRayl)
Fiber composite 0.60 201 3.30 3943 9.2 25 13.0
PVDF 0.13 6.5 1.8 2150 12 4 3.87
LiNbO3 crystal 0.49 28 4.64 7340 10 000 1000 34.0
PbTiO3 ceramic 0.49 200 6.90 5200 120 111 35.9
kt is the thickness mode electromechanical coupling coeﬃcient εs/ε0 is the clamped dielectric constant; ρ
is the density; c is the longitudinal wave velocity; Qm and QE are the mechanical and electrical quality
factors, respectively; and Za is the acoustic impedance.
TABLE II
Design Parameters.
Thickness Zb Zm
Material (µm) (MRayl) (MRayl) Tuning |Ze| (Ω) θ (◦) Focusing
Fiber composite 32 ∼1 3 yes 40 −40 spherical shaping
PVDF 9 3.15 no no 22 −50 spherical shaping
LiNbO3 crystal 60 5.9 7.3 no 60 −70 EPO-TEK 301 lens
PbTiO3 ceramic 32 5.9 3 yes 40 45 spherical shaping
Zb and Zm are the acoustic impedances of the backing and matching materials respectively; |Ze| is the
magnitude of electrical impedance; and θ is the phase angle of transducers at their center frequencies. The
electrical impedance values for PbTiO3 and ﬁber composite transducers are those after electrical tuning.
raised to 40.2 Ω after the tuning, as shown in the Fig. 1(b).
Fig. 2 shows a diagram of the electrical tuning circuit.
All of the transducers were tested in a distilled, de-
gassed water bath in pulse/echo mode by reﬂecting the
signal oﬀ a smooth quartz target placed at the fo-
cal point. During bandwidth measurements, excitation
was achieved with a Panametrics (Waltham, MA) model
5900PR pulser/receiver. Coupling was 50 Ω during both
send and receive modes. Cable length between the pulser
and transducer was 30 mm. The reﬂected waveforms were
received and digitized by a 500-MHz LC534 Lecroy (Chest-
nut Ridge, NY) oscilloscope set to 50-Ω coupling. An il-
lustration of the experimental arrangement is shown in
Fig. 3(a). The measured pulse/echo waveforms are dis-
played in Fig. 4. Insertion loss was measured using the
same approach reported by Sherar and Foster [5] and,
therefore, did not include compensation for losses caused
by diﬀraction. The experimental arrangement is shown in
Fig. 3(b). Excitation was achieved using a 10-cycle sine
wave burst from a Wavetek (San Diego, CA) model 81
function generator with 50-Ω coupling. The reﬂected wave-
forms were received by the Lecroy oscilloscope in 1-MΩ
coupling mode. The cable length between the transducer
and function generator was 1 m, and that between the
function generator and oscilloscope was 15 to 20 cm.
The UBM system is a high frequency ultrasound scan-
ning system that acquires adjacent A-scan lines to obtain a
high resolution two-dimensional image of tissue. The prin-
ciple involved in the UBM was described elsewhere [16]
and will not be repeated. The UBM system utilized in this
work included three components. The ﬁrst component was
a position control system. The transducer was translated
linearly using a servo motor with a 15-mm travel distance
Fig. 1. The electrical impedance magnitude and phase angle of the
45-MHz PbTiO3 ceramic transducer with a 3-mm aperture before
(a) and after (b) the electrical tuning is applied. The solid line is
magnitude, and the dashed line is the phase.
172 ieee transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 49, no. 2, february 2002
Fig. 2. Diagram of the electrical tuning circuit used with the PbTiO3
device.
(Model LAR37; SMAC, Carlsbad, CA) and an encoder
with 5-µm resolution. Stepper motors (Parker Hanniﬁn
Corp., Cleveland, OH) provided positioning in the two
planes orthogonal to the servo motor using a combination
hardware and software controller (DMC-1700; Galil Mo-
tion Control, Inc., Mountain View, CA). The second com-
ponent consisted of imaging electronics designed in-house,
including a pulser, a receiver with time gain compensation
(TGC), a bandpass ﬁlter, and two signal compression cir-
cuits. The pulser provided a negative 60-V pulse of 20-ns
duration; the receiver incorporated 14 dB of linear gain
and 40 dB of TGC gain. The bandpass ﬁlter eliminated
noise outside the transducer bandwidth. After ﬁltering, the
RF signal was compressed logarithmically to a 70-dB dy-
namic range. The last component was a data acquisition
and image display unit. The output signal from the log
compression ampliﬁer was digitized by an A/D converter
(CS8500; GAGE Applied Sciences Inc., Montreal, Quebec,
Canada) to 8-bit resolution at a 500-MHz sampling rate.
After digitization and data reconstruction, the information
was stored in the hard drive of a Pentium PC for image
processing. A software image processing tool (MATLAB
Image Processing Toolbox; The Math Works, Inc., Natick,
MA) was used for scan conversion, image processing, and
display. One frame of a B-mode image was obtained by
moving the transducer in a 6-mm linear range and obtain-
ing 256 equidistant scan lines. The image size was 6 mm
(width) × 8 mm (depth) and is displayed using 256 gray
levels. All of the devices were subject to these same excita-
tion and gain conditions and post-processiong algorithms.
The test object, an excised human eye, was submerged in a
saline solution (sodium chloride, 0.85%, w/v). The object
was mounted on a block of wax and ﬁxed in position with
needles.
Fig. 3. Experimental arrangement for the measurement of transducer
pulse/echo response (a) and transducer insertion loss (b).
III. Results and Discussion
Table III summarizes the measured results and com-
pares them to Krimholtz, Leedom, and Matthaei (KLM)
simulations (PiezoCAD; Sonic Concepts, Woodinville,
WA).
The ﬁber composite transducer displayed a 47% band-
width and 34.4 dB insertion loss as shown in Fig. 4(a) and
Table III. The −20 dB pulse length is 67 ns. The material
properties should yield high bandwidth and sensitivity for
the transducer; however, its relatively high dielectric con-
stant makes electrical tuning a necessity given the 53-MHz
frequency and 3-mm aperture size. The large discrepancy
between the modeled and experimental insertion loss may
be the result of a number of factors. It is speculated that
the non-uniform distribution of ﬁbers results in a poor
transfer of stress between the polymer matrix and ceramic
ﬁbers. Although electromechanical coupling as measured
using resonance techniques is high, the surface displace-
ment is probably far from iso-strain. Other losses may re-
sult from disbonding between the polymer and ceramic or
from the non-ideal properties of the transformer.
Shown in the Fig. 4(b) is the pulse/echo response of
the PVDF transducer. The measured results show a band-
width as wide as 118%, as summarized in Table III, and
snook et al.: high frequency, single-element transducers 173
TABLE III
Comparison Between Theoretical Modeling and Measured Results.
KLM modeling Measured results
Materials CF (MHz) BW (%) IL (dB) CF (MHz) BW (%) IL (dB)
Fiber composite 53 50.7 17.1 53.6 47 34.4
PVDF 55 87 30 48.1 118 45.6
LiNbO3 crystal 50 61 21 44.5 74 21.3
PbTiO3 ceramic 61 27.7 19 45.1 47 23.7
CF is the center frequency, BW is bandwidth, and IL is the insertion loss.
Fig. 4. Time-domain pulse/echo response and normalized frequency spectrum for ﬁber composite (a), PVDF (b), LiNbO3 crystal (c), and
PbTiO3 ceramic transducers (d).
174 ieee transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 49, no. 2, february 2002
Fig. 5. UBM images of a human eye acquired using, from top to
bottom, the ﬁber composite, PVDF, LiNbO3 crystal, and PbTiO3
ceramic transducers.
−20 dB pulse length of 44 ns. However, the low electrome-
chanical coupling and high loss displayed by PVDF lead
to a low sensitivity as indicated by an insertion loss of
46 dB at the center frequency. The KLM model again pre-
dicted an insertion loss considerably lower than the ob-
served value. Because the PVDF properties used in the
model were acquired at frequencies <10 MHz, most of this
disagreement may be attributed to frequency dispersion of
the electromechanical properties.
The LiNbO3 transducer displayed excellent sensitivity
as demonstrated by an insertion loss of 21 dB, a signiﬁ-
cant improvement in sensitivity compared with the ﬁber
composite and PVDF designs. In addition, the LiNbO3 de-
vice still maintained a large bandwidth of 74% as shown
in the Fig. 4(c). The −20 dB pulse length was 56 ns. Good
agreement between theory and experiment was observed.
The PbTiO3 ceramic transducer yielded an insertion
loss of 23.7 dB at the center frequency, a value similar to
that observed for the LiNbO3 device. It is worth noting
that the shape of the spectrum was approximately Gaus-
sian as shown in the Fig. 4(d). The bandwidth was 47%,
and the −20 dB pulse length was 74 ns. Variation between
the experimental and modeled values again may be at-
tributed to the inadequacy of the PiezoCAD program to
represent the coaxial transmission cable properly.
The images of the excised human eye acquired with dif-
ferent transducers are shown in Fig. 5. The transducers
with better sensitivity, such as LiNbO3 and PbTiO3, dis-
play improved image contrast. The cornea and a portion of
the iris are clearly seen. The quality of the images acquired
by ﬁber composite and PVDF transducers is poorer, a re-
sult attributed to their lower sensitivities.
IV. Conclusions
Four diﬀerent transducers of 3-mm aperture size and
center frequencies near 50 MHz were designed and built.
Their performances were compared by pulse/echo re-
sponses and human eye images. The results show that
transducer designs incorporating LiNbO3 crystal and
PbTiO3 ceramic show excellent sensitivity with good
bandwidth, indicating that both the lens focusing and
press-focusing techniques are useful at high frequency. Al-
though the PVDF transducer displays the largest band-
width, it suﬀers from poor sensitivity; the ﬁber composite
transducer displays medium sensitivity and bandwidth.
Although it has been shown that the LiNbO3 and
PbTiO3 transducers provided a larger signal, a general-
ized statement cannot be made about whether these de-
vices produce superior ultrasound images. Given the spe-
ciﬁc electronics and signal gain schemes of this UBM sys-
tem, the LiNbO3 and PbTiO3 did produce superior im-
ages; however, other schemes could yield diﬀerent results.
Fabricating the transducers from diﬀerent materials
with similar designs was a great challenge; thus, it was
very diﬃcult to compare the performances and imaging
abilities of the piezoelectrics directly. Although there was
snook et al.: high frequency, single-element transducers 175
uniformity among the designs, it was necessary to incorpo-
rate unique fabrication aspects to each device to optimize
its performance.
Acknowledgment
The authors thank Mr. Eugene Gerber for his help in
fabricating the transducers.
References
[1] F. S. Foster, C. J. Pavlin, G. R. Lockwood, L. K. Ryan, K. A.
Harasiewicz, L. Berube, and A. M. Rauth, “Principles and ap-
plications of ultrasonic backscatter microscopy,” IEEE Trans.
Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 608–616,
Sep. 1993.
[2] G. R. Lockwood, D. H. Turnbull, D. A. Christopher, and F. S.
Foster, “Beyond 30 MHz: Applications of high frequency ultra-
sonic imaging,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 60–71,
Nov.-Dec. 1996.
[3] K. K. Shung and M. J. Zipparo, “Ultrasonic transducers and
arrays,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 20–30, Nov.–
Dec. 1996.
[4] M. J. Zipparo, K. K. Shung, and T. R. Shrout, “Piezoceramics
for high-frequency (20–100 MHz) single-element imaging trans-
ducers,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr., vol.
44, no. 5, pp. 1038–1048, Sep. 1997.
[5] M. D. Sherar and F. S. Foster, “The design and fabrication of
high frequency poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride) transducers,” Ultrason.
Imaging, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 75–94, 1989.
[6] D. A. Knapik, B. Starkoski, C. J. Pavlin, and F. S. Foster, “A
real time 200 MHz ultrasound B-scan imager,” in 1997 IEEE
Ultrason. Symp. Proc., pp. 1457–1460.
[7] K. Yokosawa, R. Shinomura, S. Sano, Y. Ito, S. Ishikawa, and
Y. Sato, “A 120-MHz ultrasound probe for tissue imaging,” Ul-
trason. Imaging, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 231–239, 1996.
[8] R. J. Meyer, Jr., “High frequency (15–70 MHz) 1-3
PZT ﬁber/polymer composites: Fabrication and characteriza-
tion,” Ph.D. dissertation, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA, 1999.
[9] R. J. Meyer, Jr., P. Lopath, S. Yoshikawa, and T. R. Shrout,
“High frequency 1-3 composite transducers fabricated from
alkoxide-derived PZT ﬁbers,” in 1997 IEEE Ultrason. Symp.
Proc., pp. 915–918.
[10] R. E. McKeighen, “Design guidelines for medical ultrasonic ar-
rays,” Proc. of SPIE, vol. 3341, pp. 2–18, May 1998.
[11] C. S. Desilets, J. D. Fraser, and G. S. Kino, “The design of eﬃ-
cient broad-band piezoelectric transducers,” IEEE Trans. Son-
ics Ultrason., vol. SU-25, pp. 115–125, 1978.
[12] G. R. Lockwood, D. H. Turnbull, and F. S. Foster, “Fabrication
of high frequency spherically shaped ceramic transducers,” IEEE
Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Contr., vol. 41, no. 2, pp.
231–235, Mar. 1994.
[13] H. Wang, T. R. Ritter, W. Cao, and K. K. Shung, “Passive
materials for high frequency ultrasonic transducers,” in Proc.
SPIE Med. Imag. Symp., vol. 3664, pp. 35–42, 1999.
[14] Z.-Y. Cheng, V. Bharti, T.-B. Xu, S. Wang, and Q. M. Zhang,
“Transverse strain responses in electrostrictive poly(vinylidene
ﬂuoride-triﬂuoroethylene) ﬁlms and development of a dilatome-
ter for the measurement,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 86, no. 4, pp.
2208–2214, 1999.
[15] J. M. Cannata, J.-Z. Zhao, S. Ayyappan, T. A. Ritter, W. Chen,
and K. K. Shung, “Fabrication of high frequency (25–75 MHz)
spherically shaped ultrasonic transducers,” in 1999 IEEE Ultra-
son. Symp. Proc., vol. 2, pp. 1099–1103.
[16] D. Turnbull, B. G. Starkoski, K. A. Harasiewicz, J. L. Sem-
ple, L. From, A. K. Gupta, D. N. Sauder, and F. S. Foster, “A
40–100 MHz B-scan ultrasound backscatter microscope for skin
imaging,” Ultrason. Med. Biol., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 79–88, 1995.
Kevin A. Snook was born in Lehighton,
PA on July 17, 1976. He received B.S. de-
grees in biomedical and electrical engineering
from Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
MD, in 1998 and an M.S. in bioengineering
from Penn State University, University Park,
PA, in 2000. He is currently a Ph.D. student
in the Bioengineering Department at Penn
State University and works in the NIH Ul-
trasound Transducer Resource Center. His in-
terests include characterization of high fre-
quency devices, transducer modeling, piezo-
electric single-element transducers, and high frequency annular ar-
rays.
Jian-Zhong Zhao received his B.S. degree in physics from Henan
Normal University, China in 1982, his M.S. degree in physics from
JinLin University, China in 1988, and the Ph.D. in materials engi-
neering from The Pennsylvania State University in 1998.
From 1988 to 1991, he was an assistant professor in the Physics
Department in ZhengZhou Institute of Technology, China. In 1992,
he joined the research team in the Materials Research Laboratory
at Penn State as a visiting scientist and worked in the development
of new piezoelectric materials for transducer, actuator, and sensor
applications. From 1998 to 2000, he worked in NIH Transducer Re-
source Center at Penn State as a postdoctor and then a research
associate, working on the development of high frequency transducers
for medical applications. He joined GE Parallel Design as an acoustic
engineer in 2000 and now is currently working for Siemens Acuson
as a product engineer.
Carlos H. F. Alves (S’96–A’97) was born
in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil on July 9, 1961. He
received the B.S. degree in electrical engineer-
ing from the Pontiﬁcie Catholic University,
PUC/RJ, Brazil, in 1987 and the M.S. and
D.S. degrees in biomedical engineering from
the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, RJ,
Brazil in 1991 and 1997, respectively. From
January 1998 to December 1999, he was a
postdoctor with the NIH Resource Center for
Medical Ultrasonic Transducer Engineering at
The Penn State University, where he worked
on the development of an ultrasound backscatter microscopy system
and design and fabrication of high frequency ultrasonic single ele-
ment and annular array transducers.
Since 1991, he has been a professor of the Federal Center of Tech-
nological Education, CEFET/RJ, Brazil. His interests include high
frequency ultrasound imaging systems and transducer design.
Jonathan M. Cannata was born in Car-
son, CA on August 4, 1975. He received his
B.S. degree in bioengineering from the Uni-
versity of California at San Diego in 1998, and
his M.S. degree from The Pennsylvania State
University in 2000. Mr. Cannata is currently
pursuing a doctorate degree in Bioengineering
at The Pennsylvania State University. There,
he studies under the guidance of Dr. K. Kirk
Shung at the NIH Ultrasonic Transducer Re-
source Center. His current research interests
include the design, modeling, and fabrication
of high frequency single element transducers and arrays for medical
imaging applications.
176 ieee transactions on ultrasonics, ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 49, no. 2, february 2002
Wo-Hsing Chen is a doctoral candidate
in bioengineering at The Pennsylvania State
University. He received the B.S. degree in
Biomedical Engineering from Chung-Yuan
Christian University in Taiwan in 1991, and
the M.S. degree in medical engineering from
the George Washington University in 1995.
His research interests include high frequency
ultrasound backscatter microscopy and ultra-
sound 3-D imaging.
Richard J. Meyer, Jr. was born in Pitts-
burgh, PA on May 7, 1971. He studied ceramic
science and engineering and graduated with a
B.S. degree in 1993 from The Penn State Uni-
versity. He received his Masters in 1995 in ma-
terials at the Materials Research Laboratory
under the direction of Thomas Shrout and
Shoko Yoshikawa and completed his Ph.D. in
October 1998 with the development of high
frequency 1-3 composite transducers.
After graduation, he studied two years as
a research associate working with Dr. Robert
E. Newnham at the Materials Research Laboratory, The Penn State
University and was promoted to his current position at the Applied
Research Laboratory, Penn State. His research interests include ce-
ramic processing, development of undersea and medical ultrasonic
devices, and composite materials for actuators and transducers.
Timothy A. Ritter (A’97) was born in Har-
risburg, Pennsylvania on February 19, 1965.
He earned his B.S. in mechanical engineer-
ing from The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA, in 1987 and his M.S. in
physics from the University of Connecticut,
Storrs, CT, in 1991.
Mr. Ritter is presently a Ph.D. student in
the Bioengineering Department at The Penn-
sylvania State University and serves as a man-
ager of the NIH Resource Center for Medi-
cal Ultrasonic Transducer Technology. His re-
search interests are piezoelectric transducers, transducer modeling,
and high frequency arrays. He is an Associate Member of the IEEE.
K. Kirk Shung (S’73–M’75–SM’89–F’93)
was born on June 2, 1945. He received a
B.S. degree in electrical engineering from
Cheng-Kung University in Taiwan in 1968,
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineer-
ing, respectively, from University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO, in 1970, and the University
of Washington, Seattle, WA, in 1975. Follow-
ing postdoctoral work, he was employed as a
research scientist at Providence Medical Cen-
ter, Seattle, WA, while holding a position of
research engineer at the Institute of Applied
Physiology and Medicine, Seattle. In 1979, he moved to the Penn-
sylvania State University as an assistant professor of bioengineering
and became a professor in 1989. He was appointed director of the
Whitaker Center for Medical Ultrasonic Transducer Engineering at
Penn State in 1994.
Dr. Shung is a fellow of the IEEE, of the American Institute of
Ultrasound in Medicine, and of the Acoustical Society of America.
He is a founding fellow of the American Institute of Medical and Bi-
ological Engineering. He served as a member on National Institutes
of Health Diagnostic Radiology Study Section from 1985 to 1989. He
was the recipient of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society early career achievement award in 1985.
Dr. Shung has published more than 100 papers and is the author
of a textbook, Principles of Medical Imaging, published by Academic
Press in 1992 and the co-editor of a book, Ultrasonic Scattering by
Biological Tissues, published by CRC Press in 1993. His research
interests are in ultrasonic imaging and tissue characterization, ultra-
sonic transducers and arrays, and contrast agents.
