Development of an ultra-portable echo device connected to USB port
Yoshifumi Saijo a,*, Shin-ichi Nitta a
, Kazuto Kobayashi b
, Hitoshi Arai b
,
Yukiko Nemoto b
a
Department of Medical Engineering and Cardiology, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University,
4-1 Seiryomachi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan
b
Honda Electronics Co. Ltd., 20 Oyamazuka, Oiwa-cho, Toyohashi 441-3193, Japan
Abstract
In practical cardiology, a stethoscope based auscultation has been used to reveal the patient’s clinical status. Recently, several
hand-held echo devices are going on market and they are expected to play a role as ‘‘visible’’ auscultation instead of stethoscope. We
have developed a portable and inexpensive echo device which can be used for screening of cardiac function. Two single element
transducers were attached 180 apart to a rotor with 14-mm diameter. The mechanical scanner, integrated circuits for transmitting
and receiving ultrasonic signals and an A/D converter were encapsulated in a 150 · 40 mm probe weighing 200 g. The scan
was started and the image was displayed on a Windows based personal computer (PC) as soon as the probe was connected to USB
2.0 port of the PC. The central frequency was available between 2.5 and 7.5 MHz, the image depth was 15 cm and the frame rate was
30/s. The estimated price of this ultra-portable ultrasound is about 3000 US$ with software. For 69 cardiac patients with informed
consent, image quality was compared with those obtained with basic range diagnostic echo machines. Left ventricular ejection
fraction (EF) derived from normal M-mode image of standard machines (EFm) were compared with visual EF of the ultra-portable
ultrasound device (EFv). The image quality was comparable to the basic range diagnostic echo machines although short axis view of
aortic root was not clearly visualized because the probe was too large for intercostal approach. EFv agreed well with EFm. The
ultra-portable ultrasound may provide useful information on screening and health care.
 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Echography; Portable; Personal computer; USB 2.0
1. Introduction
In practical cardiology, a stethoscope based auscul-
tation has been used to reveal the clinical status of pa-
tients. Recently, several hand-held echo devices have
been going on market and they are expected to play
a role as ‘‘visible’’ auscultation instead of stethoscope.
Previous studies have shown that portable ultrasound
devices detect major cardiovascular pathology better
than the physical examination [1–6]. The miniaturized
devices have been achieved by the development of
nano-machining and informative technologies. Besides
those innovations, the social need for the small and
inexpensive ultrasound diagnosis is arising because the
increase of elderly population and their high-quality in-
home care are the common social problem in devel-
oped countries. For example, new insurance system
for elderly care was established in Japan because the
former social health care insurance system had
not been able to cover the treatment in all ages. The
ultra-portable ultrasound system may provide useful
information for early detection of the disease and
complications of the elderly people and patients at
home.
We have developed an ultra-portable echo device
which operated in connection with a USB 2.0 port of a
personal computer (PC). The objectives of the present
study were to evaluate the image quality of the ultra-
portable echo device and to assess the feasibility for
measuring cardiac function, by comparing the images
obtained with the ultra-portable device to those
obtained with conventional echocardiography ma-
chines.
*
Corresponding author. Tel.: +81-22-717-8517; fax: +81-22-717-
8518.
E-mail address: saijo@idac.tohoku.ac.jp (Y. Saijo).
0041-624X/$ - see front matter  2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ultras.2003.11.009
Ultrasonics 42 (2004) 699–703
www.elsevier.com/locate/ultras
2. Materials and methods
Fig. 1 shows the appearance of the transducer con-
nected to the USB 2.0 port of a laptop PC. A mechanical
scanner, integrated circuits for transmitting and re-
ceiving ultrasonic signals and an A/D converter were
encapsulated in a 150 · 40 mm probe weighing 200 g.
The sampling frequency of the A/D converter was 12
MHz and the resolution was 8-bit. Envelope of the RF
signal was sent to the PC through USB 2.0 connection.
The depth of the image, sensitivity of receiving ultra-
sound and frame rate were controllable by PC. How-
ever, pulse repetition frequency or transmission power
was ﬁxed and these parameters were not controlled by
PC.
Fig. 2 shows the schematic illustration of the scan-
ning. Two single element transducers were attached 180
apart to a rotor with 14-mm diameter. The rotor rotated
one-directional way to make mechanical scan. The
electrical power was supplied via the USB 2.0 port. The
scan was started and the image was displayed on a
Windows based PC as soon as the probe was connected
to USB 2.0 port of the PC. Both still images and movies
were stored in the hard disk of PC. Measurements and
analysis were available when the stored images and
movies were displayed on the screen. In the present
study, 3.5 MHz ultrasound transducer was used al-
though the central frequency was available between 2.5
and 7.5 MHz for the system. The depth of the image was
up to 15 cm and the frame rate was 30/s.
Thirty three healthy volunteers at a mass general
examination and 36 patients at cardiology clinics with-
out previous history of myocardial infarction were in-
volved in the study. Each volunteer and patient accepted
the study with written informed consent. Commercially
available ultrasound machines used in the study were
Nemio (Toshiba, Tokyo, Japan), SONOS 2500 (Philips,
Mountainview, USA) and SSD 2000 (Aloka, Tokyo,
Japan).
The assessment of the image quality was performed
by comparing the movies stored in the hard disk from
the portable ultrasound system and those recorded on S-
VHS video tapes from the commercial ultrasound
machines. Two blinded cardiologists experienced in
echocardiography were involved in the comparison
study. One cardiologist recorded the parasternal long
axis view, parasternal short axis view, apical two
chamber view and apical four chamber view of the
identical patient by both portable and conventional
machines. The other cardiologist observed the movies
and scored the image quality according to the following
criteria: 0 point as poor image, 0.5 point as fair image
and one point as good image, respectively. The portions
of the interest were (1) motion of mitral valve (MV) for
rapid movement, (2) visualization of left ventricular
posterior wall (PW) of parasternal long axis view for
blood-myocardium interface traceability, (3) visualiza-
tion of aortic valve (AV) for short axis view, (4) visu-
alization of left main trunk of coronary artery (LMT)
for precise image, (5) visualization of pulmonary vein
(PV) by apical approach for far ﬁeld image, (6) visuali-
zation of apex (APEX) of left ventricle by apical ap-
proach for near ﬁeld image, and (7) myocardium
(MYO) for echo pattern.
Eﬃciency for clinical cardiology of the ultra-portable
device was tested in assessment of systolic function. M-
mode based calculation of left ventricular ejection
fraction (LVEF) with Teicholtz method (EFm) was
performed using the conventional machines. By viewing
the stored movies, subjective estimation of LVEF from
two-dimensional echocardiography (EFv) was per-
formed. EFm and EFv were compared and correlation
coeﬃcient was calculated.
Fig. 1. Appearance of the transducer connected to USB 2.0 port of
laptop PC.
Fig. 2. Schematic illustration of the scanning.
700 Y. Saijo et al. / Ultrasonics 42 (2004) 699–703
3. Results
Fig. 3 is an example of the image taken by the ultra-
portable ultrasound device. This is normal heart. Fig. 4
is a case of pericardial eﬀusion in a cardiology clinic.
Fig. 5 shows the absolute values of image quality.
Signiﬁcant diﬀerences were observed in all items. Fig. 6
shows the relative values of image quality compared
with the conventional machines. LMT and AV of the
ultra-portable machines scored half values of those in
conventional machines. APEX and PW scored compa-
rable to those of the conventional machines.
Fig. 7 shows the correlation between EFm and EFv.
The open circle and dotted line indicated the correlation
of the volunteer and the closed circle and the solid line
indicated the relation in patients. The correlation coef-
ﬁcient of EFm and EFv in the volunteers was R2
¼ 0:75
and the coeﬃcient in the patients was R2
¼ 0:94.
Fig. 3. An image of a normal heart obtained with the ultra-portable
ultrasound system.
Fig. 4. A case of a patient with pericardial eﬀusion found at a cardi-
ology clinic.
Fig. 5. Absolute values of image quality. Signiﬁcant diﬀerences were
observed in all items.
Fig. 6. Relative values of image quality compared with the conven-
tional machines. (LMT: left main trunk of coronary artery, PV: pul-
monary vein, Apex: apex of left ventricle, MV: mitral valve, AV: aortic
valve, Myo: myocardium).
Fig. 7. Correlation between computed EF (EFm) and visual EF (EFv).
Y. Saijo et al. / Ultrasonics 42 (2004) 699–703 701
4. Discussion
The latest development in echocardiography is the
hand-held ultrasound device. Previous studies have
shown that portable ultrasound devices detect major
cardiovascular pathology better than the physical ex-
amination, but their diagnostic accuracy is still un-
known. Some reports indicated that the image quality
and signal accuracy were comparable to those obtained
by the commercial machines. We have developed more
portable and inexpensive ultrasound device which can
be operated just by linking it to the USB 2.0 port of
a PC. This ‘‘ultra-portable’’ ultrasound device featured
only B-mode imaging. However, the targeted market
price is 3000 US$ for the probe and software and it may
be used not only screening at the clinics but also for
elderly care at home. The purpose of this study was to
compare the results of examinations made with ultra-
portable devices to those obtained with conventional
echocardiography.
The image quality of the device was inferior to that of
conventional machines. Especially, scores for AV and
LMT visualization were half of those in conventional
machines. The limitation may cause from the large size
transducer head for intercostal approach. The image
quality of the PW and MV was comparable to those of
conventional machines. Pericardial eﬀusion was rightly
detected by the ultra-portable machine. The minimum
requirements of echocardiography in cardiology may be
assessing left ventricular function and detecting peri-
cardial eﬀusion or aneurysms. In the period of ﬁrst
clinical testing of the device, a patient with aneurysm did
not appear but a patient with pericardial eﬀusion was
detected at the clinic. This patient admitted to the hos-
pital for further evaluation and treatments. The fact
suggested that this ultra-portable device would be useful
for mass screening for cardiac patients.
Another important requirement for cardiology is
assessment of left ventricular function, especially sys-
tolic function. LVEF was derived from M-mode based
formula and visual EF estimation from the ultra-por-
table device. Both values were correlated well. This
indicates the ultra-portable ultrasound is useful in the
some situations. One is the follow-up of the contractility
of the patient once fully examined by high-end ultra-
sound machines. Other possibility of the use of this
device is in-home care. Besides the conventional bio-
logical parameters such as body temperature, heart rate
and blood pressure, this device may provide the infor-
mation of nutrition or heart failure by observing heart
movement and detecting pericardial and/or pleural
eﬀusions. The early detection of the abnormal status
may rescue the patient’s life and it may reduce the total
medical cost. The device can also be applied for tele-
medicine in corporation with the development of
broadband communication systems.
For the use of hand-carried cardiac ultrasound
(HCU) devices, American Society of Echocardiography
(ASE) concerned about the inappropriate use or inac-
curate data acquisition, interpretation, and response to
the result [5]. ASE recommended a minimum of level 1
(number of personally performed examinations is 75 and
number of personally interpreted examinations is 150)
training for independent performance or interpretation
of HCU and level 2 (number of personally per-
formed examinations is 150 and number of personally
interpreted examinations is 300) for independent per-
formance or interpretation of comprehensive echocar-
diography. These recommendations indicate that
experienced examiner and proper education system are
required for the practical use in mass screening or in-
home care although the cost for this ultra-portable de-
vice is low.
5. Conclusions
An ultra-portable ultrasound system was developed
and its clinical eﬃciency was tested. The image quality
was comparable of that in lower-range ultrasound de-
vices except the short axis view. The visually estimated
EF by this device was accurate and the result suggested
the appropriate use of the device may open the new
possibility in practical cardiology and in-home care.
Although it requires skill and knowledge to visualize
and to understand the image, this ultra-portable device
provides more chance for general physicians, nurses
working for in-home care to use the echo for monitoring
patients.
Acknowledgements
A part of this study was supported by a research
grant from The Mechanical Social Systems Foundation
in Tokyo, Japan.
References
[1] V. Burdjalov, P. Srinivasan, S. Baumgart, A.R. Spitzer, Hand-held,
portable ultrasound in the neonatal intensive care nursery: a new,
inexpensive tool for the rapid diagnosis of common neonatal
problems, J. Perinatol. 22 (6) (2002) 478.
[2] A.W. Kirkpatrick, R.K. Simons, R. Brown, S. Nicolaou, S.
Dulchavsky, The hand-held FAST: experience with hand-held
trauma sonography in a level-I urban trauma center, Injury 33 (4)
(2002) 303.
[3] S.M. Ryan, E. Smith, P.S. Sidhu, Comparison of the SonoSite and
Acuson 128/XP10 ultrasound machines in the Ôbed-side’ assessment
of the post liver transplant patient, Eur. J. Ultrasound 15
(1–2) (2002) 37.
[4] M. Rugolotto, C.P. Chang, B. Hu, I. Schnittger, D.H. Liang,
Clinical use of cardiac ultrasound performed with a hand-carried
702 Y. Saijo et al. / Ultrasonics 42 (2004) 699–703
device in patients admitted for acute cardiac care, Am. J. Cardiol.
90 (9) (2002) 1040.
[5] J.B. Seward, P.S. Douglas, R. Erbel, R.E. Kerber, I. Kronzon,
H. Rakowski, L.D. Sahn, E.J. Sisk, A.J. Tajik, S. Wann,
Hand-carried cardiac ultrasound (HCU) device: recommenda-
tions regarding new technology. A report from the Echocardio-
graphy Task Force on New Technology of the Nomenclature
and Standards Committee of the American Society of
Echocardiography, J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 15 (4) (2002)
369.
[6] P.D. Garrett, S.Y. Boyd, T.D. Bauch, B.J. Rubal, J.R. Bulgrin,
E.S. Kinkler Jr., Feasibility of real-time echocardiographic evalu-
ation during patient transport, J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 16 (3)
(2003) 197.
Y. Saijo et al. / Ultrasonics 42 (2004) 699–703 703
