This content has been downloaded from IOPscience. Please scroll down to see the full text.
Download details:
IP Address: 178.20.51.116
This content was downloaded on 24/07/2015 at 10:31
Please note that terms and conditions apply.
A review of piezoelectric polymers as functional materials for electromechanical transducers
View the table of contents for this issue, or go to the journal homepage for more
2014 Smart Mater. Struct. 23 033001
(http://iopscience.iop.org/0964-1726/23/3/033001)
Home Search Collections Journals About Contact us My IOPscience
Smart Materials and Structures
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 (26pp) doi:10.1088/0964-1726/23/3/033001
Topical Review
A review of piezoelectric polymers as
functional materials for electromechanical
transducers
Khaled S Ramadan1,3
, D Sameoto2
and S Evoy1
1
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Alberta, 2nd Floor,
ECERF (9107-116 Street), Edmonton, AB, T6G 2V4, Canada
2
Mechanical Engineering Department, University of Alberta, 4–9 Mechanical Engineering Building,
Edmonton, AB, T6G 2G8, Canada
E-mail: kramadan@ualberta.ca
Received 21 June 2013, revised 9 December 2013
Accepted for publication 18 December 2013
Published 17 January 2014
Abstract
Polymer based MEMS and microfluidic devices have the advantages of mechanical flexibility,
lower fabrication cost and faster processing over silicon based ones. Also, many polymer
materials are considered biocompatible and can be used in biological applications. A valuable
class of polymers for microfabricated devices is piezoelectric functional polymers. In addition
to the normal advantages of polymers, piezoelectric polymers can be directly used as an active
material in different transduction applications. This paper gives an overview of piezoelectric
polymers based on their operating principle. This includes three main categories: bulk
piezoelectric polymers, piezocomposites and voided charged polymers. State-of-the-art
piezopolymers of each category are presented with a focus on fabrication techniques and
material properties. A comparison between the different piezoelectric polymers and common
inorganic piezoelectric materials (PZT, ZnO, AlN and PMN–PT) is also provided in terms of
piezoelectric properties. The use of piezopolymers in different electromechanical devices is
also presented. This includes tactile sensors, energy harvesters, acoustic transducers and
inertial sensors.
Keywords: piezopolymers, piezocomposites, voided charged polymers
(Some figures may appear in colour only in the online journal)
Contents
1. Introduction 2
2. Piezoelectricity 2
2.1. Definition of piezoelectricity 2
2.2. Analytical formulation of piezoelectric effect 3
2.3. The piezoelectric coefficients and modes 3
3 This is the main contributing author and to whom correspondence
should be addressed.
2.4. The electromechanical coupling 3
3. Piezoelectricity in polymers 3
3.1. Bulk piezoelectric polymers 3
3.2. Polymer piezoelectric composites 6
3.3. Voided charged polymers 6
4. State-of-the-art piezoelectric polymers 7
4.1. Bulk piezoelectric materials 7
4.2. Piezoelectric polymer composites 11
4.3. Voided charged polymers 13
0964-1726/14/033001+26$33.00 1 c
 2014 IOP Publishing Ltd Printed in the UK
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
5. Comparative analysis of piezoelectric polymers 16
6. Applications of piezoelectric polymers 18
6.1. Piezoelectric tactile sensors 18
6.2. Vibration energy harvesters 18
6.3. Acoustic transducers 22
6.4. Inertial sensors 22
7. Conclusion 22
References 23
1. Introduction
A piezoelectric material can have an electrical field induced
across its boundaries when a mechanical stress is applied on
it, or vice versa. This piezoelectric effect was first discovered
by the Curie brothers in 1880 [1]. In the first half of the 20th
century, different macro-scale electromechanical transducers
were developed based on piezoelectric materials which were
more directed to military and marine applications [2]. Since the
idea of integrated microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)
emerged in the 1980s, it has been realized that piezoelectric
materials can add an advantageous functionality for building
such systems [3]. This led to different piezoelectric MEMS
(or, briefly, piezoMEMS) devices that are commonly used
now in the automotive industry, smart phones and other
everyday applications [4]. These microsystems are mainly
based on inorganic piezoelectric materials because of the
well established experience of the silicon microelectronic
industry which was the core motive for the emerging MEMS
technology. However, the usage of such inorganic materials
poses some challenges such as the high temperature processing
required for thin film fabrication and polar reorientation [4], the
toxicity of lead-containing materials like lead zirconate titanate
(PZT) and the need for high cost manufacturing capabilities
for fabrication. To counter the inorganic materials’ complexity,
there has been a new trend of exploring polymeric materials
in the MEMS field since the 1990s [5].
The use of polymer materials in different MEMS and
microfluidics applications had an increasing interest due to
the advantages that polymer materials have. These advantages
include the mechanical flexibility which is necessary in cer-
tain applications compared to silicon. Also, polymer based
devices are commonly less expensive in terms of material cost
and processing technology which includes soft lithographic
techniques [6] that do not commonly require advanced micro-
fabrication facilities. The commonly used polymers in many
microfabricated devices are generally electrically insulating
and mechanically flexible compared to inorganic materials.
Yet, there are many polymers that have additional properties
that make them distinctly advantageous in certain applications.
These functional polymers include conductive [7], electroac-
tive [8] and semiconducting [9] polymers. There are different
review papers about polymer MEMS [5] and microfluidics [6,
10] devices in the literature which are referenced here for the
reader.
Electroactive polymer (EAP) materials mechanically de-
form by the application of an electrical stimulus. They can
be divided into electronic and ionic EAPs according to the
operating principle [8]. In an electronic EAP, the electrome-
chanical transduction is due to the electrostatic manipulation
of dipoles while it is due to the manipulation of ions within
the ionic EAP. Tiwari and Garcia [11] recently reviewed the
main type of ionic EAPs, which is the ionic polymer–metal
composites, in terms of fabrication and characterization. We
here focus on piezoelectric polymers which are categorized
as electronic EAPs. Piezoelectric polymers can be used to
fabricate piezoMEMS at a lower cost and potentially easier
processing than their inorganic counterparts. This paper pro-
vides a review of the different piezoelectric polymers that can
be used in the MEMS field for sensing and actuation in terms
of their operating principles and properties of the different
materials. This includes three main categories: bulk polymers,
piezoelectric polymer composites and voided charged poly-
mers. Because the piezoelectricity term is not as commonly
treated in polymers as in piezoelectric ceramics or inorganic
materials, an introductory section about piezoelectricity is
provided in order to identify the common definitions and
terminologies which will be readdressed in each piezoelectric
polymer type with proper specific definitions related to the
operating principle of each type. State-of-the-art piezoelectric
polymer materials used in MEMS from 2009 until 2013
are also reviewed with a focus on material properties, pro-
cessing techniques and applications specifically for sensing
and energy harvesting. A comparative analysis between the
different piezoelectric materials and their most common inor-
ganic counterparts for MEMS is also presented. The review
is concluded with remarks on future trends and challenges for
piezopolymers in the field of microfabrication.
2. Piezoelectricity
2.1. Definition of piezoelectricity
The term ‘piezoelectricity’ is used to describe dielectric ma-
terials that produce electrical charges across their boundaries
due to the application of a mechanical stress, which is called
the direct piezoelectric effect [12]. The indirect (or converse)
piezoelectric effect happens when the material is subjected
to an electrical field which causes a mechanical strain of the
material. In piezoelectric materials, the relationship between
induced charges per unit area and the applied stress is linear
and reversible. In inorganic piezoelectric crystalline materials,
such as aluminum nitride (AlN) [13], this phenomenon hap-
pens due to the arrangement of ions in the crystal structure of
the dielectric material. The internal polarization of the material
changes linearly with the applied stress, causing an electrical
field to develop across the material boundary. Such crystal
structures are said to lack inversion symmetry [14]. For an
AlN thin film, the piezoelectric coefficient is highly dependent
on the crystal orientation of the film, which cannot be changed
after deposition. Alternatively, in a ferroelectric material, such
as lead zirconate titanate (PZT), the internal dipoles of the
material can be reoriented by the application of an external
electric field, leaving a remanent polarization at zero applied
electric field [3]. This remanent polarization also changes with
the applied stress and this is where piezoelectricity takes place.
So every ferroelectric material is piezoelectric but not every
piezoelectric material is ferroelectric.
2
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
2.2. Analytical formulation of piezoelectric effect
Based on thermodynamic potential and energy exchange prin-
ciples [12], the piezoelectric phenomenon can be formulated
with the following equations:
Di = εoεσ
i j Ei + di J σJ (1)
δI = SE
I J σJ + dIi Ei (2)
where D is the electric displacement; E is the electric field;
σ is the stress; δ is the strain; εo is the free space electric
permittivity; d is the piezoelectric coefficient; εσ is the
material’s electric relative permittivity (or dielectric constant)
matrix at a constant stress and SE is the material’s mechanical
compliance matrix; I and J are indices with values from 1–6
while i and j are indices from 1–3. D and E are (3 × 1) tensors
indicating the three coordinate directions x, y and z. σ and
δ are (6 × 1) tensors indicating the normal stresses or strains
(elements from 1–3) and shear stresses or strain (elements
from 4–6).
2.3. The piezoelectric coefficients and modes
The piezoelectric strain coefficient di J is a (3 × 6) tensor
which is defined as the electric polarization generated in
direction i in the material per unit mechanical stress of index
J applied to it or the induced mechanical strain of index J
per unit electric field applied in direction i. The piezoelectric
d coefficient has the unit of coulombs/newton or meters/volt.
There are other piezoelectric coefficients that are defined in
different ways such as the piezoelectric stress coefficient e, the
piezoelectric voltage coefficient g and the inverse piezoelectric
strain coefficient h [15]. They are all related and can be derived
from one another but we will restrict ourselves in this review
to the d coefficient in order to get a useful insight comparing
the different materials.
In most of the piezoelectric materials, there are only 3
or 4 piezoelectric coefficient elements and the rest of the
elements are zero in the (3 × 6) tensor. The two popular and
common elements in most piezoelectric materials are d31 and
d33. The d33 coefficient is called the longitudinal coefficient,
which describes the electric polarization generated in the same
direction as the stress applied. The d31 coefficient is called the
transverse coefficient, which describes the electric polarization
generated in a direction perpendicular to the direction of the
applied stress. In piezoelectric MEMS, it is common to use
the terminology 31 mode and 33 mode to distinguish the
two transduction mechanisms. Figure 1 illustrates graphically
the two modes. It also should be noted that the effective
piezoelectric coefficient of a thin film is different from that
of a bulk substrate of the same material due to the quality of
crystal orientation of the grown thin film and the boundary
conditions that the substrate imposes on the grown thin film.
The subscript f is added for the di J, f coefficient to indicate
the effective piezoelectric coefficient of the thin film, which is
what is measured practically and can be related to the di J and
the SI J constants [4].
Figure 1. The piezoelectric transduction modes.
2.4. The electromechanical coupling
A useful parameter to compare different piezoelectric mate-
rials is the electromechanical coupling coefficient denoted as
k. The coupling coefficient is a measure of the conversion
efficiency between mechanical and electrical energy using
the piezoelectric material. It takes the same indices as the
piezoelectric coefficient d and is formulated as [15]
ki J =
di J
q
εσ
ii SE
J J
. (3)
3. Piezoelectricity in polymers
There are different polymer categories that can be considered
piezoelectric. Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of the
different types. The first category of piezoelectric polymers is
the bulk polymer. These are solid polymer films that have the
piezoelectric mechanism through their molecular structure and
its arrangement. The second category is the piezoelectric com-
posite polymer. These are polymer structures with integrated
piezoelectric ceramics from which the piezoelectric effect is
generated. These composites make use of the mechanical flex-
ibility of polymers and the high electromechanical coupling
of the piezoelectric ceramics. The third type is the voided
charged polymer, a radically different type of piezoelectric
polymer than the first two categories. This is a polymer film
in which gas voids are introduced and surfaces are charged
in a way to form internal dipoles. The polarization of these
dipoles changes with the applied stress on the polymer film
(i.e. has a piezoelectric response). Each of these three classes
of polymers is discussed in the following subsections in detail
followed by state-of-the-art materials and applications.
3.1. Bulk piezoelectric polymers
Bulk piezoelectric polymers have a piezoelectric effect due
to the molecular structure of the polymer and its orientation.
There are two types of bulk polymers that have different oper-
ating principles: the semi-crystalline polymers and amorphous
polymers. A detailed review of both types and their theory and
piezoelectric properties is presented by Harrison in [15]. In
these two types, there are structural requirements that should
exist for a bulk polymer material to be piezoelectric. First, the
3
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Figure 2. Schematic diagrams of piezoelectric polymer types: (1) bulk piezopolymers: which are divided into amorphous dipolar polymers
and semi-crystalline polymers, (2) piezoelectric/polymer composites, two examples of which are piezoelectric particles embedded in
polymer or piezoelectric pillars inside polymer (also named (1–3) composites) and (3) voided charged polymers: polymers with air voids
with charged surfaces in polar form.
molecular structure of the polymer should inherently contain
molecular dipoles. Second, these dipoles can be reoriented
within the bulk material and kept in their preferred orientation
state. This reorientation is done through a process called
poling, which will be explained in section 3.1.2.
3.1.1. Semi-crystalline piezoelectric polymers. There is a
class of polymer materials that has a semi-crystalline structure
such as polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) [16], polyamides,
liquid crystal polymers [15] and Parylene-C [17]. Semi-
crystalline polymers operate in principle similar to piezo-
electric inorganic materials.
A simplified 2D schematic is shown in figure 3 to explain
the concept. The positively and negatively charged ions (or
polar group in polymers) are arranged in a crystalline form
to cause the change in polarization with applied stress. In
figure 3(a), a square structure with positive and negative
ions’ arrangement is hypothetically placed under compressive
stress. For this structure, the equivalent center of charge of the
positive and negative ions is still at the same point and there is
no polarization change due to the force applied. On the other
hand, for a 2D hexagon with the ion arrangements shown in
figure 3(b), the applied stress induces a change in the center of
charge of the positive and negative ions, which means a change
in the polarization that causes an effective electrical field.
The bulk of a semi-crystalline polymer is not a single
crystal structure. It can be viewed as randomly oriented
microscopic crystals distributed within an amorphous bulk.
In order to get an effective piezoelectric response out of such a
material, there should be an ability to reorient these crystallites
and keep them in the preferable orientation, which is done by
the poling process.
3.1.2. Poling of polymers and the enhancement of the piezo-
electric effect. The process of poling is the process of reorien-
tation of the crystallites (or, generally speaking, the molecular
dipoles) within the polymer bulk medium through the appli-
cation of a high electric field at an elevated temperature. In
order to sustain the orientation state of the molecular dipoles,
the temperature of the material is cooled down in the presence
of the electric field. There are two methods that are commonly
used in poling polymers: electrode poling and corona poling,
illustrated in figure 4.
The electrode poling, shown in figure 4(b), is simpler than
the corona poling. Conductive electrodes should be deposited
or pressed on both sides of the polymer film to apply the high
4
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Figure 3. Examples of 2D crystal structures: non-piezoelectric (a)
square and piezoelectric (b) hexagon.
voltage across the polymer. The voltage applied could be DC,
AC sinusoidal or triangular low frequency wave forms [16].
For different bulk piezoelectric polymers, the applied electric
field reported is in the range from 5–100 MV m−1 [16–19].
This strong electric field could cause the polymer to break
down; that’s why the poling process should be done in a
vacuum chamber [18] or immersed inside an electrically
insulating fluid [17, 19]. The final quality of the alignment
of crystallites (and consequently the piezoelectric coefficient
d) depends on the following factors: the strength and time of
the applied electrical field, the value and degree of uniformity
of the temperature applied on the polymer and the degree of
contamination or voids between the electrodes and the polymer
surface. For some materials like PVDF, mechanical stretching
of the polymer film during the poling process enhances the
quality of the crystallite alignment [15].
Unlike the electrode poling process, corona poling re-
quires only one side of the polymer film to be covered with
an electrode. As shown in figure 4(a), a conductive needle
subjected to very high voltage Vc (8–20 kV) is placed on
top of a grid at a much lower DC voltage Vg (0.2–3 kV),
which is on top of the piezoelectric polymer in a dry air or
argon medium [16, 18]. The gas molecules around the tip get
ionized and accelerated towards the surface of the piezoelectric
polymer. The grid position and applied voltage controls the
amount of deposited charges on the polymer surface, which
is the way to control the applied electrical field across the
polymer. The hot plate introduces heat for better control of the
poling.
As for the temperature, the required temperature for both
methods does not go beyond 300 ◦C in all cases found in
the literature. This is much lower than that required for PZT
processing temperatures, which can be as high as 1200 ◦C [4].
Although corona poling is more complicated than electrode
poling, corona poling can compensate for the polymer film
surface roughness and does not require electrode deposition.
There are other methods for poling which are less com-
monly used and reported such as electron beam poling [20],
where electron beam irradiation is used to deposit electrons
on the surface of the piezoelectric polymer which causes
the reorientation of the dipoles, similar to the corona poling
method. One advantage of such a method is the ability to
locally pole certain areas of the film by direct patterning with
the focused electron beam. The reason for not being commonly
used, however, is that it causes chemical modification and
degrades the material under poling [21]. Another interesting
charging method is the use of soft x-rays for ionization [22],
which is mainly useful for voided charged polymers. This
method will be discussed more in the relevant section.
3.1.3. Amorphous piezoelectric polymers. The piezoelectric
effect can be found in a polymer that does not have long
Figure 4. Piezoelectric polymer poling systems: (a) corona poling and (b) electrode poling.
5
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
range order (in other words non-crystalline) if its molecu-
lar structure contains molecular dipoles. Examples of such
polymers include polyimide [18, 23] and polyvinylidene chlo-
ride (PVDC) [15]. If poling is done at a temperature a few
degrees greater than the glass transition temperature of the
polymer, these dipoles can be effectively aligned with the
applied electric field. After cooling, these dipoles are not in
the same thermal equilibrium state as their counterparts in
semi-crystalline polymers. The remanent polarization Pr after
the poling process is linearly dependent on the poling electric
field Ep and the resultant piezoelectric coefficient d31 can be
determined from the following equation [15]:
d31 = Pr(1 − ν)Y

ε∞
3
+
2
3

(4)
Pr = 1εεo Ep (5)
where ν is the mechanical Poisson’s ratio, Y is Young’s
modulus of the polymer and ε∞ is the material’s permittivity
at high frequencies. The dielectric relaxation strength of a
polymer 1ε is defined as the change in the dielectric constant
of the polymer when heated from a temperature below the
glass transition temperature Tg to a temperature higher than
Tg [18].
3.2. Polymer piezoelectric composites
A piezoelectric polymer composite (or a piezocomposite) is a
polymer material with embedded inorganic piezoelectric ma-
terial. In our discussion here of what we call a piezocomposite,
the polymer is assumed to be not electromechanically active.
Meaning, a composite with a polymer matrix material like
PVDF is not what we intend to review in this section. The
advantage of mixing piezoelectric ceramics with polymers is
to combine the advantages of both materials, which include
the higher coupling factor and dielectric constant of ceramics
and the mechanical flexibility of polymers. Piezocomposites
are also the material of choice for acoustic devices because
of the polymer’s low acoustic impedance and fewer spurious
modes [24]. Arrangement of ceramic/polymer composites can
have many different combinations [24]. Arranged or ran-
domly scattered rods in polymer bulk films are commercially
available from companies like Smart Material, which are
classified as (1–3) composites. Another approach is to impinge
microscale or nanoscale particles inside a polymer matrix.
Depending on the connectivity between the particles, such
a composite could be (0–3) if the particles are completely
separated and surrounded by the polymer material, or it could
be (3–3) if the particles are in contact [25]. The rods or particles
embedded in a polymer are the most common arrangements for
composites used in millimeter to micrometer scale electrome-
chanical devices. Different analytical and numerical models
have been developed to estimate the material properties of
such composites [25–27]. Although such models are useful in
designing and predicting the different electrical, mechanical
and electromechanical properties of piezocomposites, they
are rarely used by experimentalists when new composites
are developed. This is mainly due to the complexity of the
experimental composites where multiple fillers, for example,
are used in the polymer matrix [28]. That is why it is rare to
find a developed composite material with measured values of
dielectric constant, Young’s modulus and piezoelectric coef-
ficients all reported. This introduces difficulties in comparing
such properties of the different materials, as will be seen later
in the state-of-the-art materials.
3.3. Voided charged polymers
In simple terms, voided charged polymers (sometimes called
cellular polymers) are polymer materials that contain internal
gas voids. When the polymer surfaces surrounding the voids
are charged, the voided charged polymer behaves like a piezo-
electric material, coupling electrical and mechanical energy.
Such structures can have a high piezoelectric coefficient d33
which can reach up to 20 000 pC N−1 in some cases [29], a
comparably higher value than that of piezoceramics.
This structure was first invented by Gerhard Sessler in
the early 1960s [30] when he developed a charged polymer
device to be used as a microphone. It was only viewed and
named as ‘space charged electrets’. It was not until the late
1980s that researchers accepted the concept of treating the
space charged electrets as a ‘black box’ and investigated the
piezo- and pyroelectricity of such films [31].
The concept of piezoelectricity in voided charged poly-
mers (also known as ferroelectrets or piezoelectrets) is illus-
trated in figure 5. Starting with a polymer film with embedded
air voids, internal charging of voids can be done through
electrical poling explained earlier in section 3.1.2. When a
large electric field is applied across the film, gas molecules
in the voids get ionized and opposite charges are accelerated
and implanted on each side of the voids, depending on the
applied electric field direction [31]. Such ‘artificially’ embed-
ded dipoles respond externally to an applied electrical field
or mechanical force similar to piezoelectric material. Instead
of ion displacement in a crystalline structure of a regular
piezoelectric material, deformation of the charged voids is
the cause of the piezoelectric effect.
3.3.1. Factors affecting the piezoelectric coefficient in voided
charged polymers. Conceptually, voided charged polymers
(VCP) behave like piezoelectric materials; however, the piezo-
electric coefficient in such a hybrid material depends on factors
different from that of regular piezoelectric materials. First,
there are factors related to the voids. The density and shape of
the voids affects the distribution of the final formed dipoles.
Also, the type and pressure of gas inside the voids affects
the amount of ionization occurring during the poling process.
These factors affect the value of the piezoelectric coefficient.
3.3.1.1. Frequency dependent piezoelectric response of VCPs.
There is another factor that is more dominantly influential
on VCPs than regular piezoelectric materials, which is the
dependence of the piezoelectric coefficient on the frequency
of applied force or electric field. This can be understood if the
VCP is viewed as a structure of charges suspended with dif-
ferent springs and dampers [32] as shown in figure 5(c). Such
a complicated structure has a resonant mechanical response;
therefore, the total displacement of the structure changes with
6
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Figure 5. Illustration of piezoelectricity in voided charged polymers: (a) the voided polymer before charging, (b) the electrode poling
process for forming the trapped dipoles and (c) illustrative simple model to explain the piezoresponse of VCP.
the applied frequency and consequently the generated electric
charges will be different. This variation required researchers to
define two piezoelectric coefficients: quasistatic and dynamic
piezoelectric coefficients [32]. It should be noted that the
frequency dependence of the piezoelectric coefficient exists
in other types of piezoelectric materials; however, it is not
dominant enough to be considered in designing micrometer
scale devices. For example, an experimental study of the
piezoelectric coefficient of PVDF showed no significant
change in g31, g32 and g33 coefficients at a frequency range of
400 kHz [33].
3.3.1.2. Quasistatic and dynamic piezoelectric coefficients of
VCPs. The quasistatic piezoelectric coefficient d is defined
as the electric charge density generated per unit stress (or
pressure) applied across the material at zero or very low
frequency of a few Hz. The quasistatic piezoelectric coefficient
is the value that is commonly reported and compared with other
regular piezoelectric materials. The dynamic piezoelectric
coefficient is studied by measuring the charge density per
unit stress (or pressure) applied at a range of frequencies.
The maximum dynamic piezoelectric coefficient matches the
resonance of the VCP film. As an illustration, the piezoelectric
response of commercial cellular polypropylene is shown in
figure 6 from [29]. For details about the experimental setup for
measuring these values the reader can refer to the reference. As
seen from figure 6(a), the value of the quasistatic d33 changes
with the static pressure and also with whether the film is
preloaded with a stretched force or not. Figure 6(b) shows
how the d33 value changes with the frequency of the applied
dynamic pressure, showing resonance at 300 kHz.
4. State-of-the-art piezoelectric polymers
This section reviews the state-of-the-art piezopolymers in
terms of their material properties and processing techniques.
Also, it reviews the different key applications where these
materials have been used within the last five years. There is
also an emphasis on potential materials that could be useful
for future electromechanical applications.
4.1. Bulk piezoelectric materials
In this section, the discussion is focused on three piezoelectric
polymers that have been used in MEMS applications, which
are PVDF and its various copolymers, Parylene-C and Poly-
imide. Table 1 summarizes the material properties for the three
materials. The molecular structures of the different polymers
are shown in figure 7.
4.1.1. PVDF and PVDF copolymers. PVDF is the most com-
monly used and cited piezopolymer in electromechanical de-
vices. This is because it has the largest piezoelectric coefficient,
20–28 pC N−1, compared with other bulk polymers [15].
PVDF is a semi-crystalline polymer which is synthesized by
the polymerization of H2C = CF2 monomers (see figure 7(a)).
A defect in the connected polymer chain occurs when two CF2
groups or CH2 groups are connected. Increased defects in the
polymeric chain increase the polarity of the semi-crystalline
polymeric film, which consequently increases the piezoelec-
tric response [16]. That’s why there are different synthesis
methods that have been developed to enhance the crystal
orientation such as the addition of trifluoroethylene (TrFE)
(figure 7(b)) [35], carbon black [38] or carbon nanotubes [39].
There is also research done on the addition of piezoelectric in-
organic particles with PVDF to selectively enhance the piezo-
electric or the pyroelectric response of the material through a
specific poling mechanism [40]. This includes BaTiO3 [41],
PZT [40] or ZnO [42].
As for fabrication, already poled PVDF and PVDF–TrFE
films of different thicknesses are commercially available [34].
Such films have been used to fabricate MEMS pressure
sensors [43] and an energy harvester [44]. In this case, the
device dimensions are usually in the 100s of microns to
7
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Figure 6. Quasistatic and dynamic piezoelectric d33 coefficient for cellular polypropylene: (a) quasistatic coefficient of stretched films
(circles) and non-stretched films (dots) at different static pressures and (b) interferometric measurement of dynamic piezoelectric coefficient
of a non-stretched film c
 2004 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, from [29].
Table 1. Material properties for bulk piezopolymers.
PVDF
[12, 15, 34]
PVDF–TrFE
[12, 15, 19, 34, 35]
Parylene-C
[17, 36, 37]
PI (β-CN) APB/ODPA
[15, 18]
Density (kg m−3) 1800 1900 1290 1420
Young’s modulus Y (GPa) 2.5–3.2 1.1–3 2.8 2–3
Dielectric constant εr 12 12 3.15 4
Dielectric loss tan δe 0.018 0.018 0.01
Mechanical loss tan δm 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.06
d33 (pC N−1) 13–28 24–38 2.0 5.3–16.5
d31 (pC N−1) 6–20 6–12
k33 0.27 0.37 0.02 0.048–0.15
k31 0.12 0.07
Maximum use temperature (◦C) 90 100 220
Figure 7. Molecular structure of selected bulk piezoelectric
polymers. (a) PVDF, (b) PVDF-TrFE, (c) Parylene-C and
(d) Polyimide (β-CN) APB/ODPA.
millimeter range and laser cutting is the method of choice for
patterning in that range [44, 45]. For MEMS scale applications,
the material is dissolved and spin coated. As shown in table 2,
methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) (also called 2-butanone) is the
most commonly used solvent for PVDF and its copolymers.
For patterning and etching, oxygen dry plasma is used, which
is a common method for etching most polymers.
The poling process is always a key step in PVDF fab-
rication for a high piezoelectric response. However, the spin
coating process by itself acts like mechanical stretching and
enhances the β-phase crystal orientation [35]. The thinnest
spin coated film found in the literature is 1 µm [35]. In their
study, no poling was performed and this 1 µm film showed
a piezoelectric response two times higher than a 6 µm film
fabricated with the same process. In addition, the piezoelectric
coefficient in this case is higher than the 28 pC N−1 value
of the thick films. This method simplifies the fabrication and
increases the advantages of using PVDF. Another method that
also showed a high piezoelectric coefficient of 72 pC N−1
is the nanoimprinted sub-20 nm PVDF–TrFE nanograss [46,
47]. However, this high value is not uniform across the whole
array of nanograss pillars, which could lead to unreliable
repeatability. An even higher piezoelectric response has been
achieved by recrystallization of the PVDF–TrFE film through
annealing before imprinting the nanograss on the film [48]. A
tactile sensor device was demonstrated using the PVDF–TrFE
nanograss [48].
4.1.2. Parylene-C. Parylene is commonly used as an elec-
trically insulating or encapsulation material in MEMS and
microfabrication. This is due to its biocompatibility, chemical
resistance and, more importantly, its unique vapor deposition
method. This deposition method allows conformal coating
over any surface, regardless of its porosity. The physical depo-
sition method for Parylene consists of three steps: evaporation,
pyrolysis and deposition [49]. First, the raw material in dimer
form is heated in vacuum to a temperature of 150–200 ◦C
to form a vapor. In the pyrolysis step, the vapor is broken
into monomers when heated to temperatures of 600–700
◦C. Finally, the monomer gas is polymerized on the target
8
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Table 2. Key aspects of different fabrication methods and poling conditions used for bulk piezopolymers and piezo composites.
Material Reported d Fabrication method Poling conditions
Piezopolymers
PVDF–TrFE [19] d33, f = 0.07–1 pC N−1a • Replica molding for multiple films of
30 µm total thickness
• Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) solvent used
for SU-8 on Si mold
• Tetrahydrofuran (THF) solvent used for
COC mold
DC electrode poling
• Electric field: 70 MV m−1
• Temperature: 90 ◦C for 30 min
PVDF–TrFE [35] d33, f = 38–74 pC N−1a • Spin coated PVDF dissolved in MEK for 1
and 6 µm
No poling
• Etched using oxygen plasma etching with a
photoresist mask
PVDF [51] • Electrospinning of PVDF dissolved in
acetone/N,N-dimethylformamide
No poling
• Shape of patterned structure: fibers with
100–800 nm diameter
PVDF–TrFE [52, 53] • Spin coated PVDF dissolved in RER500
solvent (ethyl lactate/MEK) for ∼2.5 µm
thickness
• Etched using oxygen plasma etching with a
Cr/Au mask
DC electrode poling
• Electric field: 80 MV m−1
• Temperature: 85 ◦C for 40 min
PVDF [44] • Commercially available PVDF poled sheets
(110 µm thickness)
N/A
• Devices defined using CO2 laser cutting
PVDF [54] d33, f = 20 pC N−1 • Casting PVDF dissolved in MEK for 20 µm
thickness
AC sinusoidal electrode poling
• Electric field: 75 MV m−1 @
0.01 Hz
• Temperature: RT
PVDF–TrFE [55] d33, f = 32 pC N−1 ±6% • Screen printing of PVDF–TrFE dissolved in
γ -butyrolactone 18%
Not specified
PVDF–TrFE [46, 47] d33, f = 72.2 pC N−1 • Nanoimprinting from a silicon mold
prepared by hydrogen plasma etching
• The PVDF–TrFE dissolved in MEK was
spin coated and the silicon mold was hot
embossed on the film
DC poling
• Electric voltage: variable 30–60 V
• Temperature: 90 or 110 ◦C
Polyimide P150
(β-CN)
APB/ODPA [18]
d33, f = 16.5 pC N−1 • Casting precursors of the polymer and cured
at a maximum temperature of 150 ◦C for
30 µm thickness
Corona poling
• Tip voltage: 20 kV
• Temperature: 223 ◦C for 4 h
212 ◦C for 1 h
• Gas: argon
Polyimide P240
(β-CN)
APB/ODPA [18]
d33, f = 5.3 pC N−1 • Casting precursors of the polymer and cured
at a maximum temperature of 240 ◦C for
30 µm thickness
DC electrode poling
• Electric field: 80 MV m−1
• Temperature: 233 ◦C for 1 h
Polyimide (β-CN)
APB/ODPA [23]
d33, f = 2.5 pC N−1a • Spin coated PI dissolved in
N,N-dimethylacetamide for 1.3 µm thickness
• Etched using oxygen plasma etching with
Al mask
DC electrode poling
• Electric field: 77 MV m−1
• Temperature: 170 ◦C for 1 h
Parylene-C [17] d33, f = 0.1–2 pC N−1 • 13 µm thickness grown by chemical vapor
deposition (CVD)
• Etched using oxygen plasma etching
DC electrode poling
• Electric field: 40 MV m−1
• Temperature: 200 ◦C for 1 h
9
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Table 2. (Continued.)
Material Reported d Fabrication method Poling conditions
Piezocomposites
ZnO/SU-8
nanocomposite [56]
d33, f = 5–8 pC N−1 • 20 wt% ZnO nanoparticles mixed in SU-8
2002 solution
N/A
d31, f = 5 pC N−1 • Device patterned with UV lithography with
exposure dose 4–5 times larger than the
standard dose for 2.7 thickness patterned
PMN–PT
nanowire/PDMS
nanocomposite [57]
• Synthesized single crystal PMN–PT
nanowires mixed with Sylgard 184 PDMS
with 1:10 ratio
• No patterning, the mix is cast on top of
polyimide and cured
DC electrode poling
• Electric field: 5 MV m−1
• Temperature: 150 ◦C for 24 h
BaTiO3 nanopar-
ticles/CNT/PDMS
composite [28]
• BaTiO3 nanoparticles mixed with carbon
nanotubes in ethanol, dried then mixed with
PDMS and cured
DC electrode poling
• Parameters not specified
PMN–PT/epoxy
(1–3) composite [58]
k33 = 0.74 • Single crystal 0.72PMN–0.28PT pillars in
epoxy (Epotecny E501) fabricated by laminate-
and-fill technique
• The final structure consists of 500 µm rods
with 300–400 µm spacing and the thickness is
2.7 mm
DC electrode poling
• Electric field: 0.6 MV m−1
• Temperature: RT
PMN–PT/epoxy
(1–3) composite [59]
k33 = 0.81 • Single crystal 0.7PMN–0.3PT pillars in
epoxy (Epotek 301) fabricated by dice-and-fill
technique
• The final structure consists of 73 µm rods
with 57 µm spacing and the thickness is
300 µm
DC electrode poling
• Electric field: 1.5 MV m−1
• Temperature: RT for 15 min
PMN–PT/epoxy
(1–3) composite [60]
k33 = 0.82 • Single crystal PMN–PT (H C Materials,
Bolingbrook, IL) in epoxy (Epotek 301)
fabricated by reactive ion etching and filling
No poling
• The final structure consists of 9 µm rods with
5 µm spacing and the thickness is 30 µm
a Values calculated based on other parameters reported in the reference.
surfaces at room temperature [49]. The Parylene-C molecular
structure, shown in figure 7(c), has a molecular dipole due to
the single chlorine atom in the benzene ring [17]. Recently, the
piezoelectric response of semi-crystalline Parylene-C has been
investigated and was also used to fabricate d33 based piezo-
electric cantilevers [37] and microphones [50]. The reported
piezoelectric coefficient of Parylene-C is 2 pC N−1, which
is very low and this raises questions for the applicability of
the material for a useful piezoelectric element. More effort is
still needed to increase the piezoresponse and make use of the
fabrication advantages of Parylene-C.
4.1.3. Amorphous polyimide. Polyimide has been used in
MEMSasastructural material[61–63]. Itshighglasstransition
temperature (360–410 ◦C) enables it to be used in high
temperature applications [61]. Research supported by NASA
has been conducted based on computational chemistry to
synthesize amorphous polyimide materials with high intensity
of molecular dipoles [15, 18, 23]. The experimental charac-
terization of nitrile-group-containing polyimide, 2,6-bis(3-
aminophenoxy) benzonitrile/4,40 oxidiphthalic anhydride,
(β-CN) APB/ODPA (table 7(d)) showed a high piezoelec-
tric response [18, 23]. The greatest advantage of (β-CN)
APB/ODPA compared with PVDF is that it operates at higher
temperature due to the high glass transition temperature. A
MEMS tactile sensor based on (β-CN) APB/ODPA polyimide
was proposed by the material’s inventors in 2003 [64]. To the
best of our knowledge, no actual device testing was presented
since then. However, focus has been driven towards enhancing
the performance of the material by mixing with single-walled
carbon nanotubes (SWNT) [65]. The 0.075% SWNT–PI
composite showed an order of magnitude increase in the
dielectric relaxation strength 1ε which consequently indicates
the same order of magnitude increase in the piezoelectric
coefficient. Although no actual devices have been reported
with this material, we still consider it a state-of-the-art material
than can allow high temperature operation of polymer MEMS
compared with PVDF which thermally degrades beyond 90 ◦C.
10
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Table 3. Material properties of piezocomposites.
PMN–0.29PT/epoxy (1–3)
composite [66] MFC R
 [67, 68]
ZnO/SU-8
20% [56]
Density (kg m−3) 5000 5440
Young’s modulus Y (GPa) 30 12.3
Dielectric constant εr 2000 ∼850 ∼7
Mechanical loss tan δm 0.06
d33 (pC N−1) 1200 374 5–8
d31 (pC N−1) 170 5
k33 0.85 0.53 0.07–0.12
k31 0.34 0.07
Maximum use temperature (◦C) ∼65 [69]a 130 ∼180a
a Temperature is estimated based on the glass transition temperature of the polymer.
Figure 8. (1–3) Piezocomposite fabrication methods adapted from [70]: on the left the laminate-and-cut method where alternating layers are
laminated and cut twice to form the (1–3) composite arrangement; on the right the dice-and-fill method where a piezoelectric ceramic
substrate is diced in two perpendicular directions at a defined thickness, then the polymer is cast to fill the gaps between the pillars and
finished by cutting or etching the support part at the bottom.
4.2. Piezoelectric polymer composites
In this section, we will review the state-of-the-art (1–3)
and (0–3) piezocomposites developed in the literature of the
last five years. Table 3 lists the material properties for the
composites that will be considered in the comparison; however,
other composites will be discussed within the forthcoming
subsections.
4.2.1. (1–3) piezocomposites. As explained earlier, (1–3)
piezocomposites consist of inorganic piezoelectric cylindrical
or square pillars embedded in a polymer matrix. There are
different methods to fabricate a (1–3) composite. The two most
common methods are dice-and-fill and laminate-and-cut [70],
both illustrated in figure 8. For this composite, the pitch is
defined as the width of the rod plus the spacing between two
rods. The methods as described in the caption lead to a pitch in
the range of 130–1000 µm, which mainly depends on the layer
thicknesses in a laminate-and-cut process or the dicing saw
resolution in a dice-and-fill process. An alternative method
for producing smaller pitch size is to use reactive ion etching
to define the rods usually with an electroplated Ni mask,
reaching a pitch size below 5 µm [60, 71, 72]. Generally, higher
frequencies of oscillation and higher coupling coefficients are
achieved by smaller pitch sizes, an advantage for ultrasonic
transducers [70]. Another way of fabricating composites is
called arrange-and-fill where rods are arranged and interlocked
by a filling polymer [70]. The pitch size of such a method is
also large.
(1–3) PZT/polymer composites are commercially avail-
able products from Smart Material, fabricated with dice-and-
fill and arrange-and-fill techniques. Different piezocomposites
with polyurethanes or epoxies are available. A typical coupling
coefficient of 0.65 can be achieved with such composites. The
main disadvantage of such material is that they cannot be
utilized for MEMS applications because of the large PZT rod
sizes. The macro-fiber composite (MFC R
), which is based on
the rod/polymer arrangement, was used in centimeter scale
acoustic [67] and energy harvesting [68] applications.
Another interesting type of composite is the ones based
on lead magnesium niobate–lead titanate PMN–PT, a recently
developed single crystal ferroelectric material that outperforms
the industrially most commonly used PZT material [73].
The ratio of PMN to PT in the crystal affects the coupling
coefficient as well as the Curie temperature [74]. Composites
of such a material reach coupling coefficients of 0.7–0.85 [59,
11
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Figure 9. Examples of piezocomposites: (a) SEM image of PMN–PT pillars fabricated by reactive ion etching before the epoxy filling for
(1–3) piezocomposite fabrication. Reprinted from [60] with permission c
 2012 Elsevier. (b) SEM images of SU-8/ZnO nanocomposite: the
surface morphology of the composite (top) and a cross section of the composite layer on top of the Cr/Au electrode (bottom). Reprinted with
permission from [56] c
 2013 Elsevier. (c) SEM images of the BaTiO3 NP/MW-CNT/PDMS composite: a cross section of the composite
with top and bottom plastic layers with evaporated electrodes (top) and close-up image showing the different elements of the composite
(bottom) c
 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, reprinted with permission from [28]. (d) SEM Image of the PMN–PT
nanowire based/PDMS composite and the inset shows an individual nanowire based PMN–PT particle, reprinted with permission from [57]
c
 2013 American Chemical Society.
60, 66]. Ultrasonic transducers were demonstrated with PMN–
PT based composites [58–60, 72]. Figure 9(a) shows an
example of PMN–PT pillars fabricated by reactive ion etching
for (1–3) based composite [60].
4.2.2. (0–3) piezocomposites. The preparation of piezocom-
posites with (0–3) connectivity is simpler than that of (1–3),
as it is a simple process of mixing the inorganic material
particles with the polymer before the latter is cured. Such
composites are easier to be integrated in microscale devices
for MEMS applications than the (1–3) composites, so long
as the size of the particles embedded is reasonably smaller.
Modeling of such fabricated composites is more difficult than
(1–3) composites. This is because of the practical limitation
of the (3–3) connection possibility in fabrication and also the
complexity introduced if more than one type of particles are
used.
Recent research has been done to incorporate ZnO
nanoparticles in SU-8 for piezoelectric applications, shown
in figure 9(b), [75]. Although ZnO has a small coupling
coefficient, the significance of such a composite lies in
the selection of the SU-8 polymer. SU-8 is a UV negative
photopatternable polymer which has been utilized in different
polymer MEMS applications [76, 77]. Therefore, direct
UV patterning of the spin coated composite simplifies the
fabrication of MEMS devices. ZnO nanoparticles of diameter
less than 100 nm were used to fill dissolved SU-8 with different
concentrations. ZnO nanoparticles should not exceed 20%
weight filling of SU-8 in order to achieve good patternability
of SU-8 [78]. For patterning a 1.5 µm thickness, the exposure
dose for 20% weight ZnO/SU-8 was reported to be 6 times
larger than that of pure SU-8. The use of the material
has recently been demonstrated for an energy harvesting
application [56].
Other composites using PDMS as the polymer have been
developed. For example, 12 wt% barium titanate BaTiO3
nanoparticles of 6100 nm diameter and 1 wt% multi-walled
carbon nanotubes MW-CNT of 5–20 nm diameter and ∼10 µm
length were mixed with Sylgard 184 PDMS precursors before
curing. SEM images of the developed composite are shown
in figure 9(c). The addition of the MW-CNT enhances the
orientation of the nanoparticles during the poling process and
consequently the piezoresponse. Films of up to 13 cm width
and 300 µm thickness were fabricated and used for energy
harvesting [28]. In another recently developed composite,
PMN–PT single crystal nanowire based particles were mixed
with PDMS with 10 wt% ratio. The innovation in this recent
study is mainly in the chemical synthesis of the PMN–PT
particles. Figure 9(d) shows a SEM image of the composite.
The inset of the image shows an individual nanowire based
12
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Table 4. State-of-the-art voided charged polymers.
Material Film dimensions Quasistatic d33 Poling process
Void formation and expansion based VCPs
Cellular
polypropylene [79, 80]
85 µm thick sheets d33, f = ∼200 pC N−1 at room
temperature
N/A
Fluorinated and
post-treated cellular
PP [81]
50 µm thick sheets with 40%
voids
After 9 days Corona poling
d33, f = ∼270 pC N−1 at 70 ◦C • Tip voltage: 25 kV
d33, f = ∼200 pC N−1 at 90 ◦C • Temperature: RT for 30 s
• Gas: nitrogen
COC based cellular
electrets [82]
— After 9 days Corona poling
d33, f =∼13pC N−1 at 110 ◦C • Tip voltage: 60 kV
• Temperature: RT for 60 s
• Gas: N2 or SF6
Cellular
polyethylene-naphthalate
(PEN) [83]
60 µm thick sheets with 30%
voids
d33, f = ∼45 pC N−1 at RT
d33, f = ∼30 pC N−1 at 100 ◦C
DC electrode poling
• DC voltage: 8.5 kV
• Temperature: RT for 30 s
• Gas: ambient air
Multilayer VCPs
PTFE/FEP multilayer
VCP [84]
5 layers of 150 µm total
thickness with 40% voids
d33, f = ∼225 pC N−1 at 90 ◦C Corona poling
• Tip voltage: 20 kV
• Temperature: RT for 20 s
FEP multilayer [85] 2 layers of 85 µm total
thickness with 80% voids
d33, f = ∼1000 pC N−1 at
120 ◦C after two days
Triangular electrode poling
• Electric field: 18 MV m−1 @ 50 Hz
• Temperature: RT
Cellular PDMS [86] 3 layers of 300 µm total
thickness with 25% voids
d33, f = 1148 pC N−1 at RT Triangular electrode poling
• Electric field: 35 MV m−1 @ 0.2 Hz
• Temperature: 90 ◦C
Micromachined
integrated cellular
Parylene [87, 88]
10 × 18 voided cell structure:
each cell has the dimensions
820 µm × 80 µm and the depth
is 350 µm
d33, f = 1200 pC N−1 at RT
stable after 120 days
Soft x-ray charging
particle where different nanowires of 200–800 nm diameters
form the particle of ∼10 µm maximum width. To sum up, these
different examples of (0–3) composites using nanoparticles
are easier and cheaper to fabricate than the (1–3) composites
with smaller scale devices, keeping the high performance
piezoelectric response of the nanoparticles and the mechanical
flexibility of polymers.
4.3. Voided charged polymers
There are many examples in the literature that are based on the
concept of voided charged polymers. Different representative
examples were selected based on the fabrication. The first
category of VCPs is manufactured based on void formation
and an expansion process. The second category is based on
bonding different layers of the same material or of different
materials in a way to introduce voids in between the layers.
The first two categories produce the VCP films separately,
not being integrated with any other material or structure. The
third category is unique on its own as the fabricated cellular
Parylene structure is the only micromachined VCP reported in
the literature that is integrated on a silicon substrate. Table 4
summarizes the key features of the different VCPs reported in
the recent five years.
4.3.1. Void formation and expansion based VCPs. This cat-
egory of VCP is the first type developed and the most char-
acterized from a material analysis perspective. The pre-poling
fabrication is based on two steps. The first one is the formation
of air voids inside the polymeric film. The second step is to
resize the voids to allow higher charge density on the surfaces
and consequently higher piezoelectric response. The resultant
fabricated film is usually in the range of 80–100 µm thick,
as indicated from table 4. Cellular polypropylene (PP) is the
13
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Figure 10. The fabrication process for cellular polypropylene.
Figure 11. Cellular polypropylene: (a) after the void generation and (b) after the void size adjustment c
 2004 IEEE. Reprinted with
permission from [90].
most popular of this type of VCP and actually the first material
that was synthesized as a space charged electret in 1987 [89].
It is still the most cited and used VCP material for acoustic
applications and electromechanical transduction.
Figure 10 shows the process steps to fabricate the cellular
polypropylene, as explained in different references [31, 32,
90]. Briefly, the synthesis of cellular PP involves the following
steps: (a) generation of the voids through introducing mi-
croscale particles inside PP and stretching (see figures 11(a)),
(b) adjustment of the voids’ size through applied gas pressure
and heating cycles (see figures 11(b)) and (c) generation of
the dipoles through electrode or corona poling. The resultant
cellular PP has ‘lens-like’ shaped voids which are anisotropic
and with crystallinity <50% [31]. This anisotropy makes the
film more flexible across the thickness than laterally. Another
method has been developed [83] in which the voids are
formed by diffusion of supercritical CO2 inside the polymer
film (polyethylene-naphthalate PEN in this case) followed by
heating to expand the gas inside the film and form the voids.
Although the quasistatic d33 in this case is lower than that of
cellular PP, however, it showed more thermal stability at high
temperature.
Given the complexity of the piezoelectric response of such
a material as explained in section 3.3.1, the characterization of
cellular PP was mainly through experimental testing [29, 91].
Nevertheless, a recent study has proposed a finite element
model to analyze and predict the piezoelectric coefficient
for a cellular PP at different conditions [92]. The reported
quasistatic piezoelectric d33 coefficient ranges in the literature
from 150–600 pC N−1 [29, 91]. This large variation is due to
14
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Figure 12. Multilayer based voided charged polymers: (a) porous PTFE with 91% air voids, (b) laminated PTFE and FEP layers (edited)
c
 2010 IEEE. Reprinted with permission from [84], (c) multilayer PDMS VCP fabricated by replica molding c
 2012 IOP Publishing,
reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved [94] and (d) FEP VCP with hemispherical voids fabricated by pressure and
thermal deformation reprinted with kind permission from Springer Science + Business Media: [85].
different conditions such as the starting film thickness and the
background pressure, in addition to the factors explained in
section 3.3.1.
4.3.2. Multilayer based VCP. The second way to fabricate
VCP is to bond multiple layers with different porous surfaces,
which introduces the voids in between the layers. This could
be through bonding layers of different materials and dif-
ferent properties like porous polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)
(Teflon R
) and nonporous fluoroethylenepropylene (FEP) [84,
93]. Figure 12(b) shows a SEM image of two porous PTFE
and three nonporous FEP layers. Similar to void formation and
expansion VCPs, the shape and distribution of voids is random
in this case.
Another fabrication method for multilayer VCP is to bond
layers of regularly patterned voids and in this case layers
are usually of the same material. The regular patterned voids
could be fabricated with different soft lithography techniques.
Figure 12(c) shows PDMS VCP fabricated by replica molding
of the PDMS pillars from an SU-8 on silicon mold and layer
bonding via oxygen plasma surface activation [94]. The other
example shown in figure 12(d) is FEP bonded layers with
hemispherical air voids fabricated by pressure and thermal
deformation on a metal template [85]. A good review of the
different non-conventional polymer patterning methods can be
found in [6] for interested readers. Regular void arrangement
allows better modeling and design. In this case simplified
analytical models can predict the behavior of such VCP [95].
4.3.3. Micromachined cellular Parylene. Micromachined cel-
lular Parylene VCP is a unique example by itself that we
chose to discuss as a different category from the previously
mentioned two types of voided charged polymers. This is
because of its unique fabrication as well as the poling process.
The cellular Parylene is fabricated by vapor deposition of
Parylene on a silicon mold micromachined by reactive ion
etching. The silicon is then etched to release the Parylene
structure that is clamped to the silicon wafer. Figures 13(a)
and (b) show SEM images of the released Parylene clamped
structure. This structure is charged with the distinctive soft
x-ray setup [87] shown in figure 13(c). Soft x-ray tubes are
usually used as a tool for charge neutralization of surfaces.
Here, a high bias voltage across the VCP is applied so that the
photo-ionized gas molecules, by the soft x-rays, are selectively
implanted on opposite surfaces of the cellular Parylene struc-
ture to form the macro-dipoles of the VCP. This structure opens
up the possibilities for on-chip integration of VCP with silicon
electronics, a unique feature that has always been considered
a challenge for VCP.
15
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Figure 13. Integrated cellular Parylene device: (a) overall device with cellular Parylene structure suspending the seismic mass, (b) close-up
image showing the clamped freestanding cellular Parylene structure and (c) a schematic diagram of the soft x-ray based charging process.
Reprinted with permission from [87] c
 2012 American Institute of Physics.
4.3.4. General remarks on voided charged polymers. The
piezoelectric response of VCP is very attractive given the
simplicity of the structure and the value of polarization per
applied stress obtained. On-chip integration is limited to only
the micromachined Parylene electret discussed in the previous
section. All other VCP are sheets in the thickness range of
50–300 µm, which are useful in applications that would
require a membrane electromechanical structure, commonly
used in acoustics and ultrasonics. Another important challenge
is the lifetime of the trapped charges in the VCP and the thermal
stability of the structure for high temperature operation.
Although it is rarely discussed in the literature, there are
two trends for increasing the thermal stability of the VCP.
The first approach is the fabrication of VCP based on
thermally stable dielectric materials, mainly fluorocarbon
based polymers like FEP and PTFE. This can be seen from
the examples in table 4, where fluorine based polymers show
higher stability of piezoelectric response up to 120 ◦C. Also, in
the micromachined Parylene electret, the fluorine-containing
Parylene dix-F was used as the initial coating to enhance higher
thermally stable charge density on the surface [88]. The other
approach is to chemically modify the surface properties of
polymer materials to maintain the charges at high temperature.
For example, the surface of PP was modified by polyhedral
oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) to reach thermally stable
operation (120 pC N−1) up to 85 ◦C [96]. In the cellular
PDMS multilayer based VCP, the surfaces were coated with
PTFE using a chemical wet process [94]. With regards to the
lifetime and aging effects, if used at room temperature the
space charges can maintain its density on the VCP for years,
which is why the electret microphone has become a successful
product since its invention [32]. However, the longest period
of aging study at higher temperature (more than 80 ◦C) found
was 20 days [96], which is still a short term period for an
industrially useful application. Despite all these challenges,
VCPs inspire more creative solutions and studies to reach a
long term stable application at high temperature.
5. Comparative analysis of piezoelectric polymers
As conveyed by the review above, there is a large range of
polymers and polymeric structures that are piezoelectrically
responsive. However, when it comes to actual applications,
there are certain concerns and factors that should be considered
for choosing a certain type over another, the most important
of which can be listed as follows:
16
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Table 5. Material properties of inorganic piezoelectric materials under consideration.
PZT PIC 151 [97] AlN [13] ZnO [98] PMN-0.29PT [66]
Density (kg m−3) 7800 3230 5610 8000
Young’s modulus Y (GPa) 60 308 201
Dielectric constant εr εr33 2400 10.5 11 5500
εr11 1980 10.5 8.5
Dielectric loss tan δe 0.02 0.005 0.05
Mechanical loss tan δm 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
d33 (pC N−1) 500 5.5 12.4 2000
d31 (pC N−1) 210 1.73 5
k33 0.69 0.31 0.48 0.9
k31 0.38 0.1 0.18
Maximum use
temperature
(◦C) 250 1150 750 ∼130 [99]
(1) The minimum response required for the application:
this is directly related to the coupling coefficient of
the material: the higher the coupling coefficient kii , the
higher the response. For an effective coupling efficiency,
the dielectric loss tan δe and the mechanical loss tan δm
should also be considered, as they degrade the ratio of
the generated energy to the energy applied. In this case,
a sufficient figure of merit for the piezoresponse can be
considered as
FOMPR =
ki J
tan δe · tan δm
. (6)
(2) Lifetime of the application: there are certain applications
that require operation at elevated temperatures for a long
time. Such applications need a piezoelectric material not
only with a high ‘Curie’ temperature but also with less
aging effects.
(3) The level of integration required: the previous two criteria
are related to the material properties whereas this criterion
adds another important factor for the selection, which is
related to the flexibility of fabrication processes related to
each material. Integrating a system on chip mostly requires
the ability to process thin films while thick films with large
feature size can be integrated off chip.
In the remainder of this section, we will focus on the
first two factors to compare the material properties of the
different piezoelectric polymers. The level of integration will
be addressed as part of the applications section discussed later.
For a broader picture, the analysis includes the three most
common inorganic piezoelectric materials which are PZT,
AlN, ZnO and the recently developed PMN–PT material.
Some important properties of these materials are shown in
table 5.
Combining factors (1) and (2) mentioned above, charac-
teristic figures have been generated to compare the different
materials. Attention is directed to the 33 mode coupling
because it is always higher than the 31 mode, in addition
to the fact that it is available and cited for the materials under
discussion. Also, it should be noted that the k33 value used for
the comparison has been calculated at room temperature for
all materials.
Figure 14 shows the coupling coefficient k33 plotted
against the maximum operating temperature for the polymeric
and inorganic piezoelectric materials while figure 15 plots the
figure of merit for these materials where data is available. The
piezocomposites and the VCPs were excluded from the figure
of merit due to the difficulty in estimating the dielectric and
mechanical losses from the literature. Actual measurement of
the two quantities is required. From the two figures, we can
conclude the following:
(1) By assessing the piezoelectric properties of the bulk piezo-
electric polymers, PI (β-CN)APB/ODPA can be consid-
ered the best choice. First, it has the highest operating
temperature for all polymers. Second, although it has
a much lower coupling coefficient, k33, than the PVDF
family (see figure 14), its smaller dielectric loss makes its
FOM in the same range as that of PVDF.
(2) Thepiezocomposites taketheadvantagesof bothinorganic
piezoelectric materials and polymers. This is clear from
their intermediate values of the coupling coefficients k33
compared with piezoelectric materials and inorganic mate-
rials. The best performance is of the PMN–PT composite,
which outperforms the other inorganic materials, rather
than PMN–PT. The maximum operating temperature is
limited by the glass transition temperature of the epoxy
used. The low modulus of piezocomposites is a big advan-
tage over inorganic materials in some sensing and energy
harvesting applications.
(3) Although the quasistatic piezoelectric coefficient of the
VCPs is the highest compared to all piezoelectric mate-
rials, the effective low Young’s modulus in the direction
of the piezoelectric response leads to a low value of the
coupling coefficient. This can be seen from the selected
VCPs plotted in figure 14.
(4) The dielectric loss plays an important role in characteriz-
ing the piezoelectric response, even between the inorganic
materials. This can be seen in the FOM of AlN.
17
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Figure 14. Coupling coefficient k33 versus maximum operating
temperature.
6. Applications of piezoelectric polymers
6.1. Piezoelectric tactile sensors
A tactile sensor is defined as a device that can measure a
physical phenomenon through contact and touch [100]. This
measured phenomenon could be temperature, shape, softness,
pressure or force [100]. This type of sensor has potential
uses in robotics as well as medicine [101]. Piezoelectric
polymers are relevant for such applications in measuring force
or pressure. It should also be noted that the pyroelectricity
of the ferroelectric polymers can be used to measure tactile
temperature. This introduces complexity for reliable measure-
ment of each phenomenon without crosstalk. As mentioned in
section 4.1.1, selective poling of ceramic/PVDF composites
can enhance piezoelectricity over pyroelectricity or vice versa
and this allows the integration of force and temperature tactile
sensors without cross talk [40]. Despite the high sensitivity
of piezoelectric tactile sensors, their use is limited to sense
dynamic forces and pressures only, as the charge generated
due to a static stress of the piezoelectric material dissipates,
depending on the dielectric constant and the resistivity of the
material [4, 100].
Figure 16 shows different examples of tactile sensors
based on flexible piezopolymers. Piezoelectric tactile sensing
is a unique piezoelectricity application that necessitates the use
of polymers over the inorganic materials due to the mechanical
flexibility and softness that is needed for the application. Even
when an inorganic piezoelectric material is used in such an
application, it is either in the form of an inorganic/polymer
composite [40] or a thin film deposited on top of a flexible
substrate [103, 104]. As can be seen from table 6, PVDF–TrFE
is the material of choice for such an application. This is
because of its biocompatibility and being the most commonly
used polymer due to its highest k33. Generally, the design
of a tactile sensor is basically a two-plate capacitor with the
piezoelectric polymer as the dielectric material, where the
applied force induces a charge across the capacitor which is
Figure 15. Piezoelectric coupling figure of merit versus maximum
operating temperature.
sensed by a voltage or charge amplifier circuit [4]. Such an
approach is not suitable for a high density array of sensors
which is a requirement of effective tactile sensing. There
is another design approach that can allow the high density
array of sensors, which is the fabrication of the piezoelectric
polymer film on top of the gate of a transistor. The piezoelectric
signal changes the gate voltage modulating the drain source
current. The largest density experimentally characterized in
the present devices is the 5 × 5 array of the piezoelectric
oxide semiconductor field effect transistor (POSFET) shown
in figure 16(a) [53]. The high sensitivity and the smallest
spatial resolution make the POSFET tactile sensor the best
choice for robotics applications. However, a big limitation of
the device presented is that it is still fabricated on a rigid silicon
substrate. That’s why designs of the same idea are fabricated
with organic thin film transistors on a polymer substrate but
with less sensitivity and spatial resolution [40, 55]. To keep the
high performance of the CMOS based tactile sensor, a novel
process of flexible single crystal silicon developed by Rojas
et al [105] can be used to release high performance POSFETs
for tactile sensing.
Figure 16(b) shows a tactile sensor array based on the
PVDF sub-20 nm nanograss mentioned in section 4.1.1. The
nanograss PVDF sensor showed a sensitivity of 0.56 V when
hit with a 98 mN force, a response 2.8 times higher than regular
flat thin films [48]. Other researchers implemented a tactile
sensing array using only polymer materials by inkjet or screen
printing [55]. Cellular PP has also been utilized in a touchpad
large area sensor (see figure 16(c)) which is based on signal
analysis of four different voltage signals at the corners of a
cellular PP film to identify the touch location. These several
examples show the significance of flexible piezopolymers for
tactile sensing applications.
6.2. Vibration energy harvesters
Energy harvesting from vibration continues to be an active
field of research with the ambition that such harvesters could
replace batteries or increase their lifetime [106]. There are
18
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Table 6. Summary of piezoelectric based tactile sensors.
Material Sensitivity Spatial resolution Comments
PVDF–TrFE [19] 9.1–10.6 mV N−1 1.5 mm × 1.5 mm Sensitivity changes with the shape and dimensions
PVDF–TrFE [35] 0.35–0.7 µV Pa−1 1.5 cm × 1.5 mm Sensitivity changes based on PVDF–TrFE layer thickness
PVDF [51] 42 mV N−1 4.4 mm × 4.4 mm Electrospun fibers between metal electrodes
PVDF–TrFE [53] 50 mV N−1 1 mm × 1 mm Polymer layer integrated on top of the gate of a CMOS transistor
PVDF–TrFE PZT
composite [40]
7.3 nA/bar 10 mm × 10 mm The piezoelectric element is connected to the gate of an organic thin
film transistor (OTFT) and the sensitivity is modulated by the current
change in the OTFT
Cellular PP [102] N/A 5 mm × 5 mm The application is a touchpad where the purpose is to allocate the
location of the touch on the cellular PP film by comparing four
different signals
Figure 16. Examples of tactile sensors: (a) POSFET sensors: SEM image showing part of the 5 × 5 array of sensors. The top left inset shows
a schematic of the sensor and the top right inset shows the cross section of the PVDF–TrFE film c
 2011 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission,
from [53]. (b) Sub-20 nm PVDF–TrFE nanograss based tactile sensor. Inset shows an illustrative schematic of the sensor c
 2012 IEEE.
Reprinted, with permission, from [48]. (c) Cellular PP based touchpad. Reprinted with permission from [102] c
 2008 American Institute of
Physics.
19
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Figure 17. Examples of piezopolymer energy harvesters: (a) SU-8/ZnO nanocomposite cantilever: schematic with layer dimensions (left)
and SEM image (right). Reprinted with permission from [56] c
 2013 Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of PVDF based frequency tunable
energy harvester (edited) c
 2012 IOP Publishing, reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved. (c) Experimental
illustration of using the BaTiO3 NP/MW-CNT/PDMS composite in power generation from human motion c
 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, reprinted with permission from [28].
many novel designs based on piezoelectric materials that
are reviewed in different references [38, 106–109]. A good
design of vibration energy harvester is dependent on the
highest harvested power possible with the smallest area at
the optimal frequency of the vibration source harvested [107].
Such an application requires the highest coupling coefficient
k for maximum power conversion. From the comparison
presented in section 5, the inorganic materials are much
more effective. However, the advantage of using polymers
over ceramics comes back to the mechanical flexibility and
lower stiffness of the piezopolymers. This flexibility prevents
fatigue and increases the lifetime of the device, especially in
low frequency vibration or applied impact force [106]. This
advantage is not only for the active piezoelectric material
but also for the electrode materials. For example, a study
showed that the use of conductive polymer PEDOT/PSS for
the electrodes with PVDF harvesting devices shows more
robustness than Pt or ITO electrodes which were damaged
after operation at frequencies higher than 33 kHz and 213 Hz,
respectively [110].
To compensate between high coupling and flexibility,
the choice of polymer composites is optimal. This is what
Patel et al [111] suggested as (1–3) PZT/Epoxy composite
harvesters generated the highest output voltage when com-
pared with PVDF and cellular PP. Also, MFC R
 has been
utilized in a cantilever based energy harvester which could
generate 151.6 µW at a resonant frequency of 20.6 Hz [68].
Cantilevers fabricated with SU-8/ZnO nanocomposite (see
figure 17(a)) generated 0.025 µW at 4 kHz frequency when
connected to 100 k load [56]. To harvest more energy,
researchers proposed another design approach where the high
power generation is adjusted to a broad band of frequencies
rather than a single resonant frequency. For example, Jo
et aldesigned a novel PVDF based energy harvester with a
tunable resonant frequency broadening the frequency band of
harvested vibration by automatically changing the suspension
beam lengths with the applied frequency, as shown in fig-
ure 17(b) [44]. Another design based on MFC R
 integrated with
magnetic oscillation allowed a broader band of low frequency
vibration [112].
The vibration source could be also in the form of mechan-
ical taping at a very low frequency in the range of less than
10 Hz. Such mechanical force can be found in human motion,
an inspiration for ‘self-powered wearable devices’ [113]. For
20
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Table 7. Acoustic device based piezoelectric polymers.
Material Application Figure of merit Design and size
Parylene-C [50] MEMS microphone Average sensitivity
5.5 µV Pa−1 up to 10 kHz
A 6 mm Parylene-C membrane
fabricated on a silicon wafer
COP voided charged
polymer [82]
Loudspeaker SPL 10–60 dB for frequency
1–10 kHz
8 bonded layers of COP VCP layers
(15 cm × 15 cm) area
COC voided charged
polymer [121]
Loudspeaker SPL 60–80 dB for frequency
1–10 kHz
5 bonded layers of different patterns with
total size 120 mm × 120 mm × 70 µm
PVDF [122] Acoustic emission sensor for
drilling process monitoring
Variation in sensed voltage
during different process steps
depending on material drilled
Hot embossed PVDF multilayers with an
epoxy detection head fabricated by
replica molding assembled in an
cylindrical packaging of 16 mm diameter
and 12 mm height
MFC R
 [67] Acoustic emission sensor for
detection of damage location
Location detection with
average STD 12.5–70 mm
depending on the material
MFC R
 rosettes with each
(25 mm × 12 mm) placed in material
plates of dimensions at least (1200 × 1200)
PVDF [118] 25 MHz ultrasonic transducer −6 dB bandwidth = 108%
Insertion loss = −39.5 dB
Circular membrane with
diameter/thickness 1.8 mm/28 µm
within optimized matching layers
(1–3) PZT/epoxy
composite [118]
25 MHz ultrasonic transducer −6 dB bandwidth = 118%
Insertion loss = −34 dB
Circular membrane with
diameter/thickness 3 mm/50 µm within
optimized matching layers
(1–3) PMN–PT/Epoxy
composite [66]
2.5 MHz ultrasonic transducer −6 dB bandwidth = 94.5%
Insertion loss = −21.3 dB
Angle beam two element transducer with
composite sheets of dimensions
22 mm × 13 mm × 0.60 mm
(1–3) PZT/epoxy
composite [66]
2.5 MHz ultrasonic transducer −6 dB bandwidth = 72%
Insertion loss = −27.3 dB
Commercially available (1–3) PZT
transducer from (CCN-DT)
Cellular PP [80] Air-coupled ultrasonic
transducer
Power transmission coefficient
PTC = 300 × 10−12 for
actuation voltage of 3000 V
Two clamped PP films, one acting as
ultrasonic transmitters and receivers
coupled through air PTC = Power
received/power transmitted
such applications, the BaTiO3 NP/MW-CNT/PDMS based
4 cm × 4 cm sheet, shown in figure 9(c) top, was used
to generate an open circuit voltage of ∼3.2 V and short
circuit current of 250–350 nA under periodic mechanical
tapping [28]. Figure 17(c) shows another sheet of the same
composite under mechanical tapping with a human leg to
simulate the power generation from walking. The PMN–PT
nanowire based/PDMS composite generator, shown in fig-
ure 9(d), produced a maximum voltage of 7.8 V and maximum
short circuit current of 2.29 µA under periodic mechanical
tapping of a 1 cm × 0.5 cm sheet [57]. In brief, piezoelectric
polymers, especially composites, are favorable for low fre-
quency vibration energy harvesting, especially when it comes
to flexibility and reliability.
6.2.1. Vibration energy harvesting and impedance matching.
Another point of consideration in assessing the performance
of vibration energy harvesters is the matching between the har-
vester input impedance and the output load impedance [114].
The output load impedance for most of the low power appli-
cations (10  to a few k range) is found to be much lower
than the harvester input impedance (hundreds of k to M
range) [109]. It is found that this point is usually neglected
among the MEMS designers of energy harvesters, and output
power is reported at the optimal output load, or the output open
circuit voltage is reported. That’s why in most of the literature
the impedance matching problem is tackled by developing in-
terface circuits to match the input and output impedance rather
than optimizing the impedance electromechanical transducer
that harvests the energy [114]. The impedance of the energy
harvester is inversely proportional to its capacitance, i.e. the
dielectric constant of the piezoelectric material. Comparing
materials in section 5, the dielectric constants of inorganic
materials are higher than that of piezoelectric polymers. This
suggests the same point about the use of piezocomposites
as the material of choice for energy harvesting. Regardless
of the piezoelectric material used, there is a MEMS design
approach that is used to overcome the high impedance problem
which is the use of multilayer structures [115, 116]. The use
of multilayer structures stacked with alternating polarization
direction reduces the device impedance and increases the
current output [115, 116]. The mechanical flexibility of the
21
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
Table 8. Accelerometer sensors based on piezoelectric polymers.
Material Sensitivity Working range Design and dimensions
PVDF–TrFE [54] • Sensitivity = 0.57 pC g−1a • Frequency: 0–200 Hz
• Acceleration: 0–7 g
• PVDF–TrFE
(0.83 mm × 1 mm × 0.2 mm) layer on top
of a suspended mass system of
polypropylene material with total area
6 mm × 6 mm
Cellular PP [124] • Variable sensitivity
increases by decreasing
static pressure Ps and
increasing mass m
• Variable frequency increases by
increasing static pressure and
reducing mass
• Acceleration: 0–11 m s−2
• A mass supported by metallic springs and
attached to the top of a cellular PP film
fixed from the other side on a rigid plate
• Mass area: 2.9 cm2
FEP electret and
cellular PP [125]
• Variable with the same
trend as cellular PP but
lower sensitivity values in
general
• Variable frequency with similar
trend
• Acceleration: 0–6 g
• Same mass and spring (as in [124]) but
attached to an FEP electret suspended by
cellular PP ring acting as a moving support
to the FEP membrane which is moving
against a rigid stationary plate. The main
charge variation is between the FEP electret
and the stationary plate, not the cellular PP
• Mass area: 11.5 mm, ring width: 1.5 mm
a g refers to the gravitational acceleration: g = 9.8 m s−2.
piezoelectric polymers in addition to the multilayer design
approach has the potential for optimal power generation at low
impedances, as theoretically illustrated by Zhang et al [115].
6.3. Acoustic transducers
Acoustic transducers are vibration based electromechanical
transducers that operate in the acoustic spectrum range includ-
ing audio, ultrasonic and infrasonic frequency ranges [117].
The piezopolymer based acoustic transducers include micro-
phones [50], loudspeakers [82] and ultrasonic transducers [67,
79, 118]. Table 7 reports different acoustic devices based
on piezoelectric polymers. The reported MEMS microphone
sensitivity is defined as the voltage variation per applied
sound pressure on the Parylene-C [50]. For a loudspeaker,
the figure of merit is the sound pressure level (SPL) which
is defined as the effective pressure of sound relative to a
reference ambient pressure [50]. The SPL changes with fre-
quency in loudspeakers. Acoustic emission sensors (AES) are
electromechanical sensors that passively detect the acoustic
signal due to a mechanical or shape change in the system
it is used in. The main difference between AES and an
ultrasonic transducer is that it detects the acoustic signal
passively while an ultrasonic transducer transmits a signal
and receives the reflected signal to detect any change. AES
are usually implemented in applications where continuous
monitoring is needed, such as material fracture or device
failure. On the other hand, ultrasonic transducers are used in
other applications such as medical imaging and automated
machinery [119]. There are many examples of ultrasonic
transducers in the literature and we reference here the main
ones that were designed recently [59, 60, 66, 72, 74, 80, 118,
120]. We chose to list in the table two studies that have used
different materials to reach the same optimum frequency to
indicate the difference in performance between the different
composite materials.
6.4. Inertial sensors
Inertial sensors are electromechanical sensors that detect
velocity, acceleration or orientation [4]. This includes two
main MEMS devices: accelerometers for acceleration mea-
surement and gyroscopes for orientation. Table 8 summarizes
the piezopolymer based inertial sensors found in the liter-
ature which are mainly accelerometers. The main criteria
for comparing accelerometers are the sensitivity, frequency
range, acceleration range and the total area and volume
of the device. These parameters are compared along with
the design principle. As can be seen from the size values,
piezopolymer accelerometers are in the scale of mm, not in
the scale of micrometers. They are also fabricated off chip
and not integrated with circuitry, a main drawback of these
accelerometers, especially if compared with capacitive silicon
micromachined accelerometers [123], which are smaller in
size with a broader working range. Yet, the advantage of
piezoelectric accelerometers is that they don’t consume power
to operate, which is not the case in capacitive accelerometers.
7. Conclusion
Piezoelectric polymers are a class of functional polymers that
can be utilized in different transduction applications. This
paper reviewed the working principle of the different types
of piezoelectric polymers classified into three categories: bulk
piezopolymers, piezocomposites and voided charged poly-
mers. Although a high electric field is required, the poling
process is necessary for an efficient piezoelectric response.
The state-of-the-art materials in each category have been
reported with the focus on fabrication methodologies and
material properties. There are a variety of fabrication methods
for piezopolymers which are different from standard silicon
microfabrication techniques. These fabrication methods (such
22
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
as replica molding, imprinting and thermal deformation) are
usually easier and less expensive than inorganic material
microfabrication. A comparative study between the differ-
ent piezoelectric polymers with the most common inorganic
piezoelectrics has been presented. The study showed that
the efficiency of transduction is highly dependent on the
dielectric loss. This is what makes amorphous polyimide
(β-CN)APB/ODPA with its polar nitrile group the most effi-
cient piezoelectric bulk polymer among the studied materials.
Further developments are needed to utilize this material in
useful MEMS devices. The study also showed how complex
it can be in comparing voided charged polymers with other
piezoelectrics, which is due to the large frequency dependence
of the piezoelectric coefficient and the stiffness constants of
the material. The applications of the piezopolymers materials
have also been reported with the key design aspects of each
device and its use. Piezopolymers offer a unique choice,
particularly in tactile sensing applications and some acoustic
devices due to the need for mechanically flexible materials
for such applications. Piezocomposites are more advantageous
when it comes to choosing a piezoelectric polymer material for
an energy harvesting application due to their highest coupling
coefficients. The newly developed PMN–PT epoxy composites
are very promising and future work will be directed to utilize
such composites in microfabricated devices. Polymer based
piezoelectric materials offer a huge variety of piezoelectric
properties with favored mechanical flexibility and mostly
easier and lower cost fabrication methods for millimeter and
micrometer scale sensors and energy harvesters.
References
[1] Curie J and Curie P 1880 Development by pressure of polar
electricity in hemihedral crystals with inclined faces Bull.
Soc. Min. France 3 90
[2] Heywang W, Lubitz K and Wersing W 2008 Piezoelectricity:
Evolution and Future of a Technology (Berlin: Springer)
[3] Setter N, Damjanovic D, Eng L, Fox G, Gevorgian S, Hong
S, Kingon A, Kohlstedt H, Park N and Stephenson G 2006
Ferroelectric thin films: review of materials, properties,
and applications J. Appl. Phys. 100 051606
[4] Tadigadapa S and Materi K 2009 Piezoelectric MEMS
sensors: state-of-the-art and perspectives Meas. Sci.
Technol. 20 092001
[5] Liu C 2007 Recent developments in polymer MEMS Adv.
Mater. 19 3783–90
[6] Becker H and Gärtner C 2008 Polymer microfabrication
technologies for microfluidic systems Anal. Bioanal.
Chem. 390 89–111
[7] Kumar D and Sharma R C 1998 Advances in conductive
polymers Eur. Polym. J. 34 1053–60
[8] Bar-Cohen Y, Kim K J, Choi H R and Madden J D 2007
Electroactive polymer materials Smart Mater. Struct. 16
S195–6
[9] McGehee M and Heeger A 2000 Semiconducting
(conjugated) polymers as materials for solid-state lasers
Adv. Mater. 12 1655–68
[10] Pan T and Wang W 2011 From cleanroom to desktop:
emerging micro-nanofabrication technology for
biomedical applications Ann. Biomed. Eng. 39 600–20
[11] Tiwari R and Garcia E 2011 The state of understanding of
ionic polymer metal composite architecture: a review
Smart Mater. Struct. 20 083001
[12] Jean-Mistral C, Basrour S and Chaillout J 2010 Comparison
of electroactive polymers for energy scavenging
applications Smart Mater. Struct. 19 085012
[13] Marauska S, Hrkac V, Dankwort T, Jahns R, Quenzer H J,
Knöchel R, Kienle L and Wagner B 2012 Sputtered thin
film piezoelectric aluminum nitride as a functional MEMS
material Microsystem Technologies 18 787–95
[14] Senturia S D 2001 Microsystem Design (Boston, MA:
Kluwer Academic Publishers)
[15] Harrison J S and Ounaies Z 2002 Piezoelectric polymers
Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Technology
(New York: Wiley) pp 474–98
[16] Dargaville T R, Celina M C, Elliott J M, Chaplya P M,
Jones G D, Mowery D M, Assink R A, Clough R L and
Martin J W 2005 Characterization, Performance and
Optimization of PVDF as a Piezoelectric Film for
Advanced Space Mirror Concepts (Livermore, CA: Sandia
National Laboratories) no. SAND 2005-6846
[17] Kim J Y, Cheng A and Yu-chong Tai 473 Parylene-C as a
piezoelectric material MEMS: 2011 IEEE 24th Int. Conf.
on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems
[18] Park C, Ounaies Z, Wise K E and Harrison J S 2004 In situ
poling and imidization of amorphous piezoelectric
polyimides Polymer 45 5417–25
[19] Li C, Wu P M, Lee S, Gorton A, Schulz M J and Ahn C H
2008 Flexible dome and bump shape piezoelectric tactile
sensors using PVDF-TrFE copolymer
J. Microelectromech. Syst. 17 334–41
[20] Gross B, Gerhard-Multhaupt R, Berraissoul A and
Sessler G M 1987 Electron-beam poling of piezoelectric
polymer electrets J. Appl. Phys. 62 1429–32
[21] Qiu X 2010 Patterned piezo-, pyro-, and ferroelectricity of
poled polymer electrets J. Appl. Phys. 108 011101
[22] Honzumi M, Ueno A, Hagiwara K, Suzuki Y, Tajima T and
Kasagi N 2010 Soft-x-ray-charged vertical electrets and its
application to electrostatic transducers MEMS: 2010 IEEE
23rd Int. Conf. on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems p 635
[23] Atkinson G M, Pearson R E, Ounaies Z, Park C,
Harrison J S, Dogan S and Midkiff J A 2003 Novel
piezoelectric polyimide MEMS 12th Int. Conf. on
TRANSDUCERS, Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and
Microsystems, 2003 p 782
[24] Safari A, Janas V F and Bandyopadhyay A 1997
Development of fine-scale piezoelectric composites for
transducers AICHE J. 43 2849–56
[25] Levassort F, Lethiecq M and Desmare R 1999 Effective
electroelastic moduli of 3-3(0-3) piezocomposites IEEE
Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control 46 1028–34
[26] Guinovart-Diaz R, Bravo-Castillero J, Rodriguez-Ramos R,
Sabina F and Martinez-Rosado R 2001 Overall properties
of piezocomposite materials 1–3 Mater. Lett. 48 93–8
[27] Kar-Gupta R and Venkatesh T 2007 Electromechanical
response of 1–3 piezoelectric composites: an analytical
model Acta Mater. 55 1093–108
[28] Park K et al 2012 Flexible nanocomposite generator made of
BaTiO3 nanoparticles and graphitic carbons Adv. Mater.
24 2999–3004
[29] Hillenbrand J and Sessler G M 2004 Quasistatic and dynamic
piezoelectric coefficients of polymer foams and polymer
film systems IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul. 11 72–9
[30] Sessler G and West J 1962 Self-biased condenser microphone
with high capacitance J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 34 1787–8
23
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
[31] Gerhard-Multhaupt R 2002 Less can be more. Holes in
polymers lead to a new paradigm of piezoelectric materials
for electret transducers IEEE Trans. Dielectrics and
Electrical Insulation 9 850–9
[32] Bauer S, Gerhard-Multhaupt R and Sessler G M 2004
Ferroelectrets: soft electroactive foams for transducers
Phys. Today 57 37
[33] Roh Y, Varadan V V and Varadan V K 2002 Characterization
of all the elastic, dielectric, and piezoelectric constants of
uniaxially oriented poled PVDF films IEEE Trans.
Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics Frequency Control 49 836–47
[34] Piezoelectric Films Technical Information. Available: www.
piezotech.fr/image/documents/22-31-32-33-piezotech-pie
zoelectric-films-leaflet.pdf [2013, 02/26]
[35] Sharma T, Je S, Gill B and Zhang J X J 2012 Patterning
piezoelectric thin film PVDF–TrFE based pressure sensor
for catheter application Sensors Actuators A 177 87–92
[36] Parylene Properties and Characteristics. Available: www.vp-
scientific.com/parylene properties.htm [2013, 3/12/2013]
[37] Kim J Y, Nandra M and Yu-chong T 2012 Cantilever
actuated by piezoelectric Parylene-C MEMS: 2012 IEEE
25th Int. Conf. on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems
p 1141
[38] Lallart M, Cottinet P, Lebrun L, Guiffard B and Guyomar D
2010 Evaluation of energy harvesting performance of
electrostrictive polymer and carbon-filled terpolymer
composites J. Appl. Phys. 108 034901
[39] Ramaratnam A and Jalili N 2006 Reinforcement of
piezoelectric polymers with carbon nanotubes: pathway to
next-generation sensors J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct. 17
199–208
[40] Graz I, Krause M, Bauer-Gogonea S, Bauer S, Lacour S P,
Ploss B, Zirkl M, Stadlober B and Wagner S 2009 Flexible
active-matrix cells with selectively poled bifunctional
polymer-ceramic nanocomposite for pressure and
temperature sensing skin J. Appl. Phys. 106 034503
[41] Ye H, Shao W and Zhen L 2013 Crystallization kinetics and
phase transformation of poly (vinylidene fluoride) films
incorporated with functionalized BaTiO3 nanoparticles
J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 129 2940–9
[42] Dodds J S, Meyers F N and Loh K J 2012 Piezoelectric
characterization of PVDF-TrFE thin films enhanced with
ZnO nanoparticles IEEE Sensors J. 12 1889–90
[43] Shirinov A and Schomburg W 2008 Pressure sensor from a
PVDF film Sensors Actuators A 142 48–55
[44] Jo S-E, Kim M-S and Kim Y-J 2012 A resonant frequency
switching scheme of a cantilever based on polyvinylidene
fluoride for vibration energy harvesting Smart Mater.
Struct. 21 015007
[45] Lee S, Bordatchev E V and Zeman M J 2008 Femtosecond
laser micromachining of polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF)
based piezo films J. Micromech. Microeng. 18 045011
[46] Hong C, Huang S, Shieh J and Chen S 2012 Enhanced
piezoelectricity of nanoimprinted sub-20 nm poly
(vinylidene fluoride–trifluoroethylene) copolymer
nanograss Macromolecules 45 1580–6
[47] Hong C, Huang S, Shieh J, Chen S and Chen A 2012
Piezoelectricity of sub-20-nm nanoimprinted PVDF-TrFE
nanograss MEMS: 2012 IEEE 25th Int. Conf. on Micro
Electro Mechanical Systems (Piscataway, NJ: IEEE)
p 1336
[48] Chen A, Lin K, Hong C, Liou T, Shieh J and Chen S 2012
Flexible tactile sensors based on nanoimprinted sub-20
NM piezoelectric copolymer nanograss films Sensors
pp 1–4
[49] Parylene deposition process. Available: http://scscoatings.co
m/what is parylene/parylene deposition.aspx last
accessed 31 May 2013
[50] Kim J Y 2013 Parylene-C as a new piezoelectric material
PhD Thesis California Institute of Technology
[51] Wang Y R, Zheng J M, Ren G Y, Zhang P H and Xu C 2011
A flexible piezoelectric force sensor based on PVDF
fabrics Smart Mater. Struct. 20 045009
[52] Dahiya R S, Valle M, Metta G, Lorenzelli L and Adami A
2009 Design and fabrication of posfet devices for tactile
sensing TRANSDUCERS 2009: Int. Solid-State Sensors,
Actuators and Microsystems Conference, 2009 p 1881
[53] Dahiya R S, Cattin D, Adami A, Collini C, Barboni L,
Valle M, Lorenzelli L, Oboe R, Metta G and Brunetti F
2011 Towards tactile sensing system on chip for robotic
applications IEEE Sensors J. 11 3216–26
[54] Schulze R, Gessner T, Schueller M, Forke R, Billep D,
Heinrich M, Sborikas M and Wegener M 2012 Integration
of piezoelectric polymer transducers into microsystems for
sensing applications ISAF/ECAPD/PFM: 2012 Int. Symp.
Applications of Ferroelectrics held Jointly with 2012
European Conf. on the Applications of Polar Dielectrics
and 2012 Int. Symp. Piezoresponse Force Microscopy and
Nanoscale Phenomena in Polar Materials p 1
[55] Zirkl M, Sawatdee A, Helbig U, Krause M, Scheipl G,
Kraker E, Ersman P A, Nilsson D, Platt D and Bodö P
2011 An all-printed ferroelectric active matrix sensor
network based on only five functional materials forming a
touchless control interface Adv. Mater. 23 2069–74
[56] Prashanthi K, Miriyala N, Gaikwad R D, Moussa W,
Rao V R and Thundat T 2013 Vibtrational energy
harvesting using photo-patternable piezoelectric
nanocomposite cantilevers Nano Energy 2 923–32
[57] Xu S, Yeh Y, Poirier G, McAlpine M C, Register R A and
Yao N 2013 Flexible piezoelectric PMN–PT
nanowire-based nanocomposite and device Nano Lett. 13
2393–8
[58] Levassort F, Hladky-Hennion A, Le Khanh H,
Tran-Huu-Hue P, Lethiecq M and Pham Thi M 2010 0–3
and 1–3 piezocomposites based on single crystal PMN-PT
for transducer applications Adv. Appl. Ceram. 109 162–8
[59] Zhou D, Cheung K F, Chen Y, Lau S T, Zhou Q, Shung K,
Luo H S, Dai J and Chan H L W 2011 Fabrication and
performance of endoscopic ultrasound radial arrays based
on PMN-PT single crystal/epoxy 1–3 composite IEEE
Trans. on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and Frequency
Control 58 477–84
[60] Liu C, Djuth F, Li X, Chen R, Zhou Q and Shung K K 2012
Micromachined high frequency PMN-PT/epoxy 1–3
composite ultrasonic annular array Ultrasonics 52 497
[61] Tsang S-H, Ma A H, Karim K S, Parameswaran A and
Leung A M 2008 Monolithically fabricated polymermems
3-axis thermal accelerometers designed for automated
wirebonder assembly MEMS 2008: IEEE 21st Int. Conf.
on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, 2008 p 880
[62] Marnat L, Arevalo Carreno A, Conchouso D,
Galicia Martinez M, Foulds I and Shamim A 2013 New
movable plate for efficient millimeter wave vertical
on-chip antenna IEEE Trans. Antennas and Propagation
61 1608–15
[63] Tsang S, Simard K, Foulds I, Izadi H, Karim K and
Parameswaran M 2009 Thin film transistor (TFT) sensing
elements fabricated in surface micromachined
polymermems for a differential calorimetric flow sensor
24
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
MEMS 2009: IEEE 22nd Int. Conf. on Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems, 2009 (Piscataway, NJ: IEEE) p 583
[64] Atkinson G M, Pearson R E, Ounaies Z, Park C, Harrison J S
and Midkiff J A 2003 Piezoelectric polyimide tactile
sensors Proc. 15th Biennial University/Government/
Industry Microelectronics Symp., 2003 p 308
[65] Deshmukh S and Ounaies Z 2010 Active single walled
carbon nanotube–polymer composites IUTAM Symp. on
Multi-Functional Material Structures and Systems (Berlin:
Springer) pp 103–10
[66] Zhang Y, Wang S, Liu D, Zhang Q, Wang W, Ren B, Zhao X
and Luo H 2011 Fabrication of angle beam two-element
ultrasonic transducers with PMN–PT single crystal and
PMN–PT/epoxy 1–3 composite for NDE applications
Sensors Actuators A 168 223
[67] Matt H and di Scalea F L 2007 Macro-fiber composite
piezoelectric rosettes for acoustic source location in
complex structures Smart Mater. Struct. 16 1489
[68] Yang Y, Tang L and Li H 2009 Vibration energy harvesting
using macro-fiber composites Smart Mater. Struct. 18
115025
[69] Epo-Tek 301 Datasheet 2012, last update September 2012
Available: www.epotek.com/sscdocs/datasheets/301.PDF
last accessed 4 June 2013
[70] Smith W A 1989 The role of piezocomposites in ultrasonic
transducers Proc. IEEE 1989 Ultrasonics Symp. 1989
p 755
[71] Lewis R, Allsopp D, Shields P, Satka A, Yu S, Topolov V Y
and Bowen C 2012 Nano-imprinting of highly ordered
nano-pillars of lithium niobate (LiNbO3) Ferroelectrics
429 62–8
[72] Sun P, Wang G, Wu D, Zhu B, Hu C, Liu C, Djuth F T,
Zhou Q and Shung K K 2010 High frequency PMN-PT
1–3 composite transducer for ultrasonic imaging
application Ferroelectrics 408 120–8
[73] Baek S, Rzchowski M S and Aksyuk V A 2012 Giant
piezoelectricity in PMN-PT thin films: beyond PZT MRS
Bull. 37 1022–9
[74] Kim K, Hsu D K, Ahn B, Kim Y and Barnard D J 2010
Fabrication and comparison of PMN-PT single crystal,
PZT and PZT-based 1–3 composite ultrasonic transducers
for NDE applications Ultrasonics 50 790
[75] Prashanthi K, Naresh M, Seena V, Thundat T and
Ramgopal Rao V 2012 A novel photoplastic piezoelectric
nanocomposite for MEMS applications
J. Microelectromech. Syst. 21 259–61
[76] Ramadan K S, Nasr T and Foulds I G 2013 Development of
an SU-8 MEMS process with two metal electrodes using
amorphous silicon as a sacrificial material J. Micromech.
Microeng. 23 35037–49
[77] Sameoto D, Tsang S and Parameswaran M 2007 Polymer
MEMS processing for multi-user applications Sensors
Actuators A 134 457–64
[78] Kandpal M, Sharan C, Poddar P, Prashanthi K, Apte P R and
Ramgopal Rao V 2012 Photopatternable nano-composite
(SU-8/ZnO) thin films for piezo-electric applications Appl.
Phys. Lett. 101 104102
[79] Doring J, Bovtun V, Gaal M, Bartusch J, Erhard A,
Kreutzbruck M and Yakymenko Y 2012 Piezoelectric and
electrostrictive effects in ferroelectret ultrasonic
transducers J. Appl. Phys. 112 084505
[80] Doring J, Bovtun V, Bartusch J, Erhard A, Kreutzbruck M
and Yakymenko Y 2010 Nonlinear electromechanical
response of the ferroelectret ultrasonic transducers Appl.
Phys. A 100 479–85
[81] An Z, Mao M, Cang J, Zhang Y and Zheng F 2012
Significantly improved piezoelectric thermal stability of
cellular polypropylene films by high pressure fluorination
and post-treatments J. Appl. Phys. 111 024111
[82] Saarimaki E, Paajanen M, Savijarvi A, Minkkinen H,
Wegener M, Voronina O, Schulze R, Wirges W and
Gerhard-Multhaupt R 2006 Novel heat durable
electromechanical film: processing for electromechanical
and electret applications IEEE Trans. Dielectrics and
Electrical Insulation 13 963–72
[83] Fang P, Qiu X, Wirges W, Gerhard R and Zirkel L 2010
Polyethylene-naphthalate (PEN) ferroelectrets: cellular
structure, piezoelectricity and thermal stability IEEE
Trans. Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation 17 1079–87
[84] Zhang X, Huang J, Wang X and Xia Z 2010 Piezoelectricity
and dynamic characteristics of laminated fluorocarbon
films IEEE Trans. Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation 17
1001–7
[85] Zhang X, Hillenbrand J, Sessler G, Haberzettl S and Lou K
2012 Fluoroethylenepropylene ferroelectrets with
patterned microstructure and high, thermally stable
piezoelectricity Appl. Phys. A 107 621–9
[86] Tsai J, Wang J and Su Y 2013 Piezoelectric rubber films for
human physiological monitoring and energy harvesting
MEMS: 2013 IEEE 26th Int. Conf. on Micro Electro
Mechanical Systems p 841
[87] Feng Y, Hagiwara K, Iguchi Y and Suzuki Y 2012
Trench-filled cellular parylene electret for piezoelectric
transducer Appl. Phys. Lett. 100 262901
[88] Feng Y and Suzuki Y 2013 All-polymer soft-x-ray-charged
piezoelectret with embedded PEDOT electrode MEMS:
2013 IEEE 26th Int. Conf. on Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems p 865
[89] Kirjavainen K 1987 Electromechanical film and procedure
for manufacturing same US Patent 4,654,546
[90] Wegener M, Tuncer E, Wirges W, Gerhard-Multhaupt R,
Dansachmuller M, Bauer-Gogonea S, Schwodiauer R and
Bauer S 2004 Ferroelectrets: highly anisotropic
electrically charged polymer foams for electromechanical
transducer applications 2004 IEEE Ultrasonics Symp.
(Piscataway, NJ: IEEE) p 1138
[91] Zhang X, Hillenbrand J and Sessler G M 2004 Piezoelectric
d33 coefficient of cellular polypropylene subjected to
expansion by pressure treatment Appl. Phys. Lett.
85 1226–8
[92] Wan Y, Fan L and Zhong Z 2012 Finite element modeling of
temporal evolution of the quasi-piezoelectric d33
coefficient of cellular piezoelectret Polypropylene film
Comput. Mater. Sci. 55 54–9
[93] Hu Z and Von Seggern H 2006 Breakdown-induced
polarization buildup in porous fluoropolymer sandwiches:
a thermally stable piezoelectret J. Appl. Phys. 99 024102
[94] Wang J, Hsu T, Yeh C, Tsai J and Su Y 2012 Piezoelectric
polydimethylsiloxane films for MEMS transducers
J. Micromech. Microeng. 22 015013
[95] Hillenbrand J and Sessler G M 2000 Piezoelectricity in
cellular electret films IEEE Trans. Dielectrics and
Electrical Insulation 7 537–42
[96] Karttunen M, Paajanen M, Härkki O, Kortet S and Orko I
2013 Thermally more durable electromechanical films by
POSS nanomodification Key Eng. Mater. 538 65–8
25
Smart Mater. Struct. 23 (2014) 033001 Topical Review
[97] PI Ceramic—Advanced Piezoelectric Materials: Typical
Parameters of Piezoelectric Ceramics, PZT
Material—Piezoceramic Materials. Available: www.picera
mic.com/piezo materials 2.php [2013, 3/20/2013]
[98] Crisler D F, Cupal J J and Moore A R 1968 Dielectric,
piezoelectric, and electromechanical coupling constants of
zinc oxide crystals Proc. IEEE 56 225–6
[99] Poterala S F, Trolier-McKinstry S, Meyer R J and
Messing G L 2011 Processing, texture quality, and
piezoelectric properties of C textured (1-x) Pb
(Mg1/3Nb2/3) TiO3-xPbTiO3 ceramics J. Appl. Phys. 110
014105
[100] Tiwana M I, Redmond S J and Lovell N H 2012 A review of
tactile sensing technologies with applications in
biomedical engineering Sensors Actuators A 179 17–31
[101] Lindahl O A, Constantinou C E, Eklund A, Murayama Y,
Hallberg P and Omata S 2009 Tactile resonance sensors in
medicine J. Med. Eng. Technol. 33 263–73
[102] Buchberger G, Schwodiauer R and Bauer S 2008 Flexible
large area ferroelectret sensors for location sensitive
touchpads Appl. Phys. Lett. 92 123511
[103] Petroni S, Guido F, Torre B, Falqui A, Todaro M T,
Cingolani R and De Vittorio M 2012 Tactile multisensing
on flexible aluminum nitride Analyst 137 5260–4
[104] Akiyama M, Morofuji Y, Kamohara T, Nishikubo K,
Ooishi Y, Tsubai M, Fukuda O and Ueno N 2007
Preparation of oriented aluminum nitride thin films on
polyimide films and piezoelectric response with high
thermal stability and flexibility Adv. Funct. Mater. 17
458–62
[105] Rojas J P, Sevilla G T and Hussain M M 2013 Structural and
electrical characteristics of high-k/metal gate metal oxide
semiconductor capacitors fabricated on flexible,
semi-transparent silicon (100) fabric Appl. Phys. Lett. 102
064102
[106] Kim H, Kim J and Kim J 2011 A review of piezoelectric
energy harvesting based on vibration Int. J. Precision Eng.
Manufacturing 12 1129–41
[107] Saadon S and Sidek O 2011 A review of
vibration-based/MEMS/piezoelectric energy harvesters
Energy Convers. Manag. 52 500
[108] Anton S R and Sodano H A 2007 A review of power
harvesting using piezoelectric materials (2003–2006)
Smart Mater. Struct. 16 R1
[109] Cook-Chennault K, Thambi N and Sastry A 2008 Powering
MEMS portable devices—a review of non-regenerative
and regenerative power supply systems with special
emphasis on piezoelectric energy harvesting systems
Smart Mater. Struct. 17 043001
[110] Lee C, Joo J, Han S, Lee J and Koh S 2005 Poly (vinylidene
fluoride) transducers with highly conducting poly (3,
4-ethylenedioxythiophene) electrodes Synth. Metals 152
49–52
[111] Patel I, Siores E and Shah T 2010 Utilisation of smart
polymers and ceramic based piezoelectric materials for
scavenging wasted energy Sensors Actuators A
159 213–8
[112] Tang L and Yang Y 2012 A nonlinear piezoelectric energy
harvester with magnetic oscillator Appl. Phys. Lett. 101
094102
[113] Leonov V 2011 Energy harvesting for self-powered wearable
devices Wearable Monitoring Systems (Berlin: Springer)
pp 27–49
[114] Chao P 2011 Energy harvesting electronics for vibratory
devices in self-powered sensors IEEE Sensors J. 11
3106–21
[115] Zhang L, Oh S R, Wong T C, Tan C Y and Yao K 2013
Piezoelectric polymer multilayer on flexible substrate for
energy harvesting IEEE Trans. Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics
and Frequency Control 60 2013–20
[116] Xu T, Siochi E J, Kang J H, Zuo L, Zhou W, Tang X and
Jiang X 2013 Energy harvesting using a PZT ceramic
multilayer stack Smart Mater. Struct. 22 065015
[117] Rossing T D 2007 Springer Handbook of Acoustics (Berlin:
Springer)
[118] Jadidian B, Hagh N M, Winder A A and Safari A 2009 25
MHz ultrasonic transducers with lead- free piezoceramic,
1-3 PZT fiber-epoxy composite, and PVDF polymer active
elements IEEE Trans. Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics and
Frequency Control 56 368–78
[119] Zhou Q, Lau S, Wu D and Kirk Shung K 2011 Piezoelectric
films for high frequency ultrasonic transducers in
biomedical applications Prog. Mater. Sci. 56 139–74
[120] Lee S T F, Lam K H, Zhang X M and Chan H L 2011
Lead-free BSZT/Epoxy 1–3 composites for ultrasonic
transducer applications Adv. Mater. Res. 254 90–3
[121] Ko W-C, Tseng C-K, Leu Y, Wu W-J, Lee A S-Y and
Lee C-K 2010 Use of 2-(6-mercaptohexyl) malonic acid to
adjust the morphology and electret properties of cyclic
olefin copolymer and its application to flexible
loudspeakers Smart Mater. Struct. 19 055007
[122] Feng G and Tsai M 2010 Acoustic emission sensor with
structure-enhanced sensing mechanism based on
micro-embossed piezoelectric polymer Sensors Actuators
A 162 100–6
[123] MEMS Accelerometers—MEMS and Sensors—Analog
Devices. Available: www.analog.com/en/mems-sensors/m
ems-accelerometers/products/index.html#iSensor MEMS
Accelerometer Subsytems [2013, 3/28/2013]
[124] Hillenbrand J, Kodejska M, Garcin Y, Seggern H V and
Sessler G M 2010 High-sensitivity piezoelectret-film
accelerometers IEEE Trans. Dielectrics Electrical
Insulation 17 1021–7
[125] Hillenbrand J, Haberzettl S, Motz T and Sessler G 2011
Electret accelerometers: physics and dynamic
characterization J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 129 3682
26
