A Low Cost Open Source High Frame-Rate High-
Frequency Imaging System
J.A. Brown1,2
, J. Leadbetter1,2
, M. Leung1
, A. Bezanson1,2
, R. Adamson1,2
1
Biomedical Engineering
Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
2
Daxsonics Ultrasound Inc.
Halifax, NS Canada
j.brown@dal.ca
Abstract— In this paper a low cost open source approach to
high-frequency ultrasound imaging is described. This complete
imaging system is based around four core components: A single-
element geometrically focused imaging transducer, a low cost
high frame-rate mechanical scanner, a field programmable gate
array (FPGA) controlled pulser-receiver unit, and a data
acquisition system running open source interface software. The
single-element imaging transducer is spherically curved
composite based on Lithium Niobate that has a centre frequency
of 45 MHz, a bandwidth of 65%, and an insertion loss of -19dB.
The mechanical scanning mechanism is based on a 45 mm long
PZT bimorph attached to an extension arm. The mechanism can
scan up to a 10 mm displacements at 100 Hz and is driven with a
low cost Arduino microcontroller. The mechanism is mounted in
an enclosed probe holder filled with deionized water. The FPGA
accurately controlling the variable timing of the pulser-receiver
unit is a Xilinx Virtex V and the data acquisition hardware
consists of an off the shelf AlazarTech PCIe digitizing card and a
PC. The hardware communication, GUI/plotting libraries, and
data collection is all controlled with an open source Python
application we have named OpenHiFUS.
Keywords—high frequency ultrasound, low cost; open source
I. INTRODUCTION
High-frequency ultrasound is still a relatively new technology
that uses micro-fabricated ultrasound transducers operating in
the 20-70MHz range to achieve imaging resolutions of a few
tens of microns, an order of magnitude higher resolution than
conventional ultrasound systems used in human diagnostic
medical imaging. In recent years, there has been a big push to
move high-frequency ultrasound systems to linear array-based
technology instead of the previous generation of mechanically
scanned single-element systems [1]. The most obvious
advantage to using an array-based system is that the depth-of-
field of the imaging transducer is increased over the single-
element fixed-focus transducers. There are some other less
dramatic advantages to the array system such as slightly higher
frame rates and more versatile Doppler imaging. After noting
the advantages of the array based system, it is also important to
note the disadvantages. Perhaps the largest disadvantage of the
array based system is the large channel count, which increases
the system cost dramatically. Whether it be because the
complexity of array micro-fabrication and interconnect issues,
parallelized high speed data acquisition, or parallelized pulser-
receiver hardware, it is obvious that the system cost is much
higher for a linear array based system. Another significant
disadvantage to the linear array-based system is the weakly
focused elevation plane or poor slice resolution. In fact, if one
were only interested in a region that falls within the depth of
field of a single element imaging transducer, the image quality
would be superior to that of a linear array-based system in that
same region. Because of the large difference in price point, and
the moderate difference in image quality, it is our belief that
there is still a place for a low cost mechanically scanned high
frequency ultrasound systems.
A high-frequency mechanically scanned ultrasound system
typically consists of an imaging transducer, a scanning system,
pulser-receiver unit, data acquisition hardware, and image
processing/display software to turn the acquired signal into a
set of images. We have developed a low cost open source
imaging system with these components by using open source
software, a low cost scanning actuator, and, for the most part,
low cost electronic hardware. The system, as conceptually
illustrated in Figure 1, is a progression from early work
conducted to develop the mechanical scanning mechanism [2].
Figure 1: Block diagram of complete imaging system.
II. SYSTEM DESIGN
Figure 2 shows a photograph of the complete imaging system
with all components mounted within a commercially available
medical cart (Ergotron, Saint Paul, MN). The system
electronics are contained within the main drawer, a small form
factor PC is mounted on the back of the cart, and the imaging
probe with its integrated mechanical scanning mechanism is
shown on top of the main drawer (A).
549
978-1-4673-5686-2/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE 2013 Joint UFFC, EFTF and PFM Symposium
10.1109/ULTSYM.2013.0142
Figure 2: Photograph of complete imaging system.
A. Imaging Probe and Mechanica Scanner
The imaging transducers used are commercially available
45 MHz single-element geometrically focused Lithium Niobate
composite transducers (Daxsonics Inc. Halifax, NS). Two
different transducers were used for data collected during this
study with slightly different apertures and f/numbers. Both
transducers have bandwidths of 65% and a single cycle
excitation pulse insertion loss of -19dB (once compensated for
water attenuation and the quartz reflector loss [3]). The first
transducer was 3.0 mm in diameter and geometrically focused
at f/3.0, the second was 2.5 mm in diameter and geometrically
focused at f/2.8. Beam diffraction predictions for lateral beam
widths are approximately 120 μm and 110 μm at the focus, and
the anticipated depth-of-field values are 2.4 mm and 2.1 mm.
As shown in Figure 3, the imaging probes are mounted onto
stainless steel extension arms and then epoxied to the free end
of a 40 mm x 10 mm x 0.6 mm cantilevered piezoelectric
bimorph. This bimorph serves as the mechanical scanning
mechanism for the imaging probe [2]. When cantilevered at the
base of the bimorph, and with the imaging probe submerged in
water for acoustic transmission, the scanner operates at its
resonance frequency of 95 Hz, potentially allowing up to 190
unique frames per second.
The probe and bimorph assembly is mounted inside a 3D
printed plastic probe housing and filled with de-ionized water.
For the acoustic window at the front of the casing, a 100
micron film of poly-methyl-pentene (TPX) was used. A fully
assembled imaging probe and mechanical scanner is shown as
held during use in Figure 4.
Figure 3: Imaging probe mounted onto stainless steel extension arm and
piezoelectric bimorph (left); External casing for imaging probe and
mechanical scanner (right).
Figure 4: Assembled imaging probe and mechanical scanner.
B. System Electroinics
As shown in Figure 5, all system electronics (aside from
the PC) are contained within a small drawer on the medical
cart.
The bimorph driving electronics are based on an open
source micro-controller (Arduino Nano), which is programmed
to act as a sine wave generator using a direct digital synthesis
(DDS) method. The signal synthesis is synchronized to the
acquisition sequence using hardware triggers from the FPGA.
The microcontroller also receives instructions to start/stop and
to adjust signal amplitude and phase from the system PC.
Output from the bimorph driver is passed through a low cost
high voltage amplifier circuit and the signal can be adjusted up
to ± 120 V, from which lateral displacements of over 10 mm
can easily be achieved.
The pulser-receiver used is a custom design, very similar to
the one described in [4]. The pulser is triggered by a low cost
FPGA (Xilinx, Virtex V, San Jose, CA) using accurately
controlled transmit pulses that correspond to 100 equally
spaced image lines as the bimorph transitions from high
velocity near the centre of the image to zero velocity at the
frame edges. Additionally, this FPGA is used to generate a
reference clock and corresponding timing triggers for the data
acquisition system, along with the previously mentioned
synchronization triggers for the bimorph driver. Generally
speaking, the FPGA’s primary function would be to accurately
550 2013 Joint UFFC, EFTF and PFM Symposium
synchronize the pulser, the scan-head, and the data acquisition
clock.
The data acquisition, processing, and display system
consisted of a PC containing a commercially available 500
MHz 12 bit PCIe digitizer (Alazar Technologies Inc., Pointe-
Claire, QC) with acquisition synchronized to the triggers
generated by the Arduino. The commercially available Alazar
data acquisition card is by far the most expensive component in
the system.
Figure 5: Photograph of system electronics contained in medical cart drawer.
C. Software Description
The open source software developed for the system
performs real-time data acquisition and processing using the
Python language. A version of this software is currently
available under the title OpenHiFUS [5] (Open High
Frequency Ultrasound). The Python language was chosen to
allow for simple customization by end users in various
applications, and for the wealth of open source libraries
available.
OpenHiFUS is predominantly based on a PyQt [6]
framework, where a series of software widgets and objects are
connected by internal Qt signals. This structure is illustrated in
Figure 6, where the main application hosts three primary
components: a micro-controller interface, a group of display
windows imaging modalities, and a data processing object
responsible for interacting with a secondary data collection
process.
The micro controller widget interacts with the bimorph
scanner via USB communication to start, stop, and adjust
oscillation amplitude. Display windows are available for B and
M mode ultrasound imaging as well as to display the
unprocessed high frequency signal. Once processed, data is
displayed in these widgets using the efficient Python library,
guiqwt [7].
Figure 6: Illustration of OpenHiFUS software design.
The third and most critical component to OpenHiFUS is the
data processing object. This is responsible for transmitting
newly processed data to the display windows, for receiving
processing instruction from the display windows (settings for
averaging, noise threshold, time gain amplification, etc.), and
for interfacing with the independently running data collection
process. Data collection and interaction with the external DAQ
hardware is handled by a second independently running
process and communication between the main application and
this second process is handled using software sockets. By using
this approach the overall acquisition rate is maximized and
unaffected by user interaction with the main application.
III. RESULTS
A. System Performance
Currently, the described low-cost hardware system running
with OpenHiFUS on a standard contemporary PC has achieved
80 frames per second (fps) of simultaneous acquisition,
processing and display. On the system discussed in the
remainder of the paper a display rate of 47.5 fps was chosen,
corresponding to every second oscillation of the 95 Hz
mechanical scanner. Currently, the limitation preventing higher
display frame rates is the serial calculations used to produce B
mode images from the captured high frequency data.
Additional work is underway to move these calculations to a
parallel graphical processing unit to increase overall
performance. It should be noted however that the system can
save and replay images at the full potential frame rate of 190
fps.
B. Imaging Results
Early stage evaluation of the system’s imaging
performance is presented here for a wire phantom, a human
wrist image, and for a mouse cardiac sequence.
Figure 7 shows a wire phantom image obtained using 15
μm aluminum wire nominally spaced at 1 mm in a de-ionized
water bath. The probe used for this image was 3.0 mm in
diameter with a relatively low focus of f/3.0; these results
551 2013 Joint UFFC, EFTF and PFM Symposium
show, as expected, the image focal region and the achieved
resolution. The best resolution is at the focal depth of 9 mm,
but since the f/number is relatively low, there is a fairly large
depth of field.
Figure 7: Water bath wire phantom image with 15 μm aluminum wire.
Figure 8 shows a B mode image of a vessel in a human
wrist, taken using the same imaging probe as in the wire
phantom image. Clearly visible is the structure of the dermus
tissue, the boundaries of the artery, and speckel produced by
blood flow within the artery.
Figure 8: B mode image of human wrist artery.
Figure 9 shows an M mode sequence from a short-axis
view of a mouse heart ventricle. Used for this sequence was
the 2.5 mm, f/2.8 imaging probe. In this image the periodicity
in the M sequence cleary shows a a heart rate of 370 bpm, as
well as mimimum and maximum ventricle diameters. The
open nature of the processing module should make it
straightforward to add strain imaging and volumetric
estimation, for instance, to the system.
Figure 9: M mode sequence from short-axis cross section of mouse ventricle.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Robert Rose and
Emmanuel Egom (Dalhousie University Department of
Physiology and Biophysics) for obtaining the presented mouse
cardiac sequence using the described imaging system.
REFERENCES
[1] F. S. Foster, J. Mehi, M. Lukacs, D. Hirson, C. White, C. Chaggares,
and A. Needles, “A New 15–50 MHz Array-Based Micro-Ultrasound
Scanner for Preclinical Imaging,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 35, no. 10,
pp. 1700–1708, 2009.
[2] A. Bezanson, R. Adamson, J.A. Brown, “A Low-Cost High Frame-Rate
Piezoelectric Scanning Mechanism for High-Frequency Ultrasound
Systems,” Proc. IEEE International Ultrasonics Symposium, 2011
[3] J. M. Cannata, T. A. Ritter, Wo-Hsing Chen, R. H. Silverman, K. K.
Shung, "Design of efficient, broadband single-element (20-80 MHz)
ultrasonic transducers for medical imaging applications," Ultrasonics,
Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, IEEE Transactions on , vol.50,
no.11, pp.1548,1557, 2003
[4] J.A. Brown, G.R. Lockwood, A Digital Beamformer for High-
Frequency Annular Arrays, IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics
Ferroelectrics & Frequency Control, Vol. 52, pp.1262-1269, 2005.
[5] J. Leadbetter, “OpenHiFUS” [Computer software]. Halifax, Canada.
2013. Available from https://github.com/j-leadbetter/OpenHiFUS
[6] Riverbank Computing Limited, “PyQt” [Computer software library].
Dorset, UK. 2013. Available from
http://www.riverbankcomputing.com/software/pyqt/intro
[7] Raybaut, P., “guiqwt” [Computer software library]. France. 2009
Available from https://code.google.com/p/guiqwt/
552 2013 Joint UFFC, EFTF and PFM Symposium
