EFFECT OF BACKING LAYER COMPOSITION ON ULTRASONIC PROBE
BANDWIDTH
KESAN KOMPOSISILAPISAN BELAKANG KE ATAS LEBAR JALUR
PROB ULTRASONIK
Amry Amin Abas, Dr Mohamad Pauzi Ismail, Suhairy Sani, Mohd Noorul
Ikhsan Ahmed
NDT Group Industrial Technology Division
Malaysian Nuclear AgencyBangi43000 Kajang Malaysia
Abstract
Backing layer of an ultrasonic probe plays an important role in determining the
characteristic of waves that is produced. Previous study has showed that the
composition of backing layer determines the sensitivity and signal to noise ratio. In
this paper, the relationship between backing layer composition and bandwidth of
probes will be discussed. The probes fabricated are 2MHz and 5MHz using Lead
Zirconate Titanate (PZT) with Alumina as wear plate. Backing layer is a mixture of
tungsten powder 100/am and slow setting epoxy at a ratio of 4:1 and 8:1 by weight.
The bandwidth of fabricated probes is measured using Wayne-Kerr impedance
analyser. From the results, it isfound that the composition of backing layer effects the
bandwidth of ultrasonic probes.
Abstrak
Lapisan belakang pada prob ultrasonik memainkan peranan yang penting dalam
penentuan ciri-ciri gelombang yang dihasilkan. Kajian terdahulu menunjukkan
bahawa komposisi lapisan belakang menentukan kepekaan dan nisbah isyarat ke
hingar. Dalam kertas kerja ini, perkaitan antara komposisi lapisan belakang dan
lebar jalur prob akan dibincangkan. Prob yang difabrikasi adalah 2MHz dan 5MHz
dengan menggunakan Plumbum Zirkonat Titanat(PZT) dan Alumina sebagai plat
perlindungan. Lapisan belakang adalah campuran serbuk tungsten JOOjumdan epoksi
lambat keras pada nisbah 4:1 dan 8:1 mengikut berat. Jalur gelombang prob yang
difabrikasi diukur menggunakan penganalisis impedans Wayne-Kerr. Daripada
keputusan, didapati komposisi lapisan belakang memberi kesan ke atas jalur
gelombang prob ultrasonik.
Katakunci/keywords : backing layer, ultrasonic probe
INTRODUCTION
The main component of an ultrasonic equipment for Non-Destructive Testing
(NDT) is the ultrasonic transducer as it converts electrical energy into mechanical
energy and vice versa by utilizing piezoelectric effect. The characteristics of the pulse
produced by the equipment depend on the electrical pulse produced by ultrasonic
pulsers that triggers the transducers and the characteristics of the transducers
themselves. The frequency, pulse length, bandwidth and near field depends on the
design of the transducers, making them the most important component within an
ultrasonic equipment.
Ultrasonic testing (UT) is used in NDT to measure thickness, detect flaws in
components such as casting, rolling products such as plates, weldments and etc.
Therefore, ultrasonic transducers should have high sensitivity and resolution. The two
properties can be achieved by producing transducers with short pulse length and high
bandwidth which can be obtained by placing a matching layer at the front face of the
transducer, using an appropriate backing layer and adding a tuned circuit to the
transducer. In this paper, only the second method which is attaching an appropriate
backing layer will be discussed.
The backing layer should have acoustic impedance which matches the piezoelectric
material to ensure good transmission of wave at the boundary. It should also have high
attenuation factor to ensure that the wave is absorbed fully and preventing it to be
reflected back into the piezoelectric material. The acoustic impedance, Z, is a product
of density, p, and wave velocity, v, given as
Z = p.v (1)
METHODOLOGY
A few backing layer samples with different tungsten powder to epoxy weight ratio
ranging from 1:1 to 8:1 were fabricated. Tungsten powder with 100|im size and
Selley’s EpoxyFix with 60 minutes cure time were used. Tungsten is selected due to
its high density value which is around 19.25gcm'3 while epoxy functions as binding
material. Tungsten is used in powder form to obtain a homogenous mixture with
epoxy. The two components are mixed according to the appropriate weight ratio and
placed in a vacuum chamber to ensure entrapped air bubbles are removed. Then the
samples are left to be cured at room temperature and condition. The samples were then
characterized according to sound velocity, density, acoustic impedance and attenuation
factor.
Ultrasonic transducers with three main components namely wear plate,
piezoelectric material and backing layer were fabricated. The wear plate used is made
of pink Alumina with one-quarter wavelength thickness. The piezoelectric material
used is Pz27 from Ferroperm Piezoceramics with two different resonance frequency of
2MHz and 5MHz. The Z value of the Pz27 is about 40MRayls. Several transducers
with different mixture ratio of tungsten powder and epoxy were fabricated.
Electrical impedance of the fabricated transducers was measured using Wayne-Kerr
impedance analyzer. From the impedance chart, the bandwidth is measured. The upper
and lower frequencies of -6dB drop of the conductance amplitude is measured. From
these upper and lower frequencies fu and fi, the centre frequency f0is calculated as in
(2).
fo = ( f » x f i ) 1/2 (2 )
Bandwidth is given as
Bw = (fu- fi) / fo x 100 (3)
Figure 1 : Impedance profile of an ultrasonic probe
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Wave velocity inside the backing layer as in figure 2 showc reduction as the
mixture ratio increases. As expected, the density of backing layer increased (figure 3)
as the ratio of tungsten increases. Acoustic Impedance value also increases as the
tungsten content increase. The highest mix ratio of 8:1 only produces backing layer
with acoustic impedance of 7.5MRayls (figure 4). Further attempt to mix higher ratio
of tungsten to epoxy failed because it has reached saturation. The attenuation factor
reduces significantly at ratio of 0.1:1, but stabilizes when the tungsten ratio increases
(figure 5).
Figure 1 : Wave Velocity vs Tungsten -
Epoxy Mixture Ratio
Figure 2 : Density vs Tungsten - Epoxy
Mixture Ratio
Figure 3 : Acoustic Impedance vs Figure 4 : Attenuation vs Tungsten -
Tungsten - Epoxy Mixture Ratio Epoxy Mixture Ratio
The bandwidth of both transducers increases with higher tungsten content (Table
1). For 2MHz transducer, the bandwidth increases from 4.06% to 21.70% as the
tungsten content increases. For 5MHz transducer, the bandwidth increases from 2.77%
to 13.45% as the tungsten content increases. For both transducers, there is not much
difference in term of bandwidth between ratio 4:1 and 8:1. For manufacturing
purposes, selection of ratio 4:1 is sufficient as cost of tungsten powder is high and
there is no significant performance gain if higher ratio is used.
TABLE 1: Bandwidth for 2MHz and 5MHz transducer
Bandwidth (%)
2MHz 5MHz
Single disc 4.06 2.77
Disc + wear plate 3.32 3.34
Tungsten : Epoxy - 1:1 12.47 10.74
Tungsten : Epoxy - 4:1 20.22 12.77
Tungsten : Epoxy - 8:1 21.70 13.45
CONCLUSION
Mixture of tungsten and epoxy clearly increases the acoustic impedance of the
backing layer, but it still does not match the impedance of PZT. The usage of backing
layer with high tungsten content increases the bandwidth of both 2MHz and 5MHz
transducers. For manufacturing purposes where cost is a factor, ratio of 4:1 is already
sufficient to obtain a wideband transducer.
REFERENCES
1. J. Krautkramer and H. Krautkramer, Ultrasonic Testing ofMaterials, Springer - Verlag 1983.
2. G. Kossoff, The Effects of Backing and Matching on the Performance of Piezoelectric Ceramic
Transducers, IEEE Transactions on Sonics and Ultrasonics, March 1966.
3. J. Souquet, P. Defranould and J. Desbois, Design of Low-Loss Wide Band Ultrasonic Transducers
for Noninvasive Medical Application, IEEE Transactions on Sonic and Ultrasonics Vol Su-26,
No.2, March 1979.
4. M.G. Silk, Ultrasonic Transducersfor Nondestructive Testing, Adam Hilger Ltd. Bristol, 1984.
5. BS EN 12268-2:2001, Non-destructive testing-Characterization and Verification of Ultrasonic
Examination- Equipment-Part2 : Probes, May 2001.
