See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:	http://www.researchgate.net/publication/280302105
A	System-on-Chip	Solution	for	Point-of-Care
Ultrasound	Imaging	Systems:	Architecture	and
ASIC	Implementation
ARTICLE		in		IEEE	TRANSACTIONS	ON	BIOMEDICAL	CIRCUITS	AND	SYSTEMS	·	MAY	2015
Impact	Factor:	2.48	·	DOI:	10.1109/TBCAS.2015.2431272
READS
26
9	AUTHORS,	INCLUDING:
Jeeun	Kang
Sogang	University
25	PUBLICATIONS			74	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE
Changhan	Yoon
University	of	Southern	California
34	PUBLICATIONS			84	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE
Jin	Ho	Chang
Sogang	University
83	PUBLICATIONS			238	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE
Yangmo	Yoo
Sogang	University
94	PUBLICATIONS			410	CITATIONS			
SEE	PROFILE
All	in-text	references	underlined	in	blue	are	linked	to	publications	on	ResearchGate,
letting	you	access	and	read	them	immediately.
Available	from:	Jeeun	Kang
Retrieved	on:	12	November	2015
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS 1
A System-on-Chip Solution for Point-of-Care
Ultrasound Imaging Systems: Architecture and
ASIC Implementation
Jeeun Kang, Changhan Yoon, Jaejin Lee, Sang-Bum Kye, Yongbae Lee, Jin Ho Chang, Senior Member, IEEE,
Gi-Duck Kim, Yangmo Yoo, Member, IEEE, and Tai-kyong Song, Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this paper, we present a novel system-on-chip
(SOC) solution for a portable ultrasound imaging system (PUS)
for point-of-care applications. The PUS-SOC includes all of the
signal processing modules (i.e., the transmit and dynamic receive
beamformer modules, mid- and back-end processors, and color
Doppler processors) as well as an efﬁcient architecture for hard-
ware-based imaging methods (e.g., dynamic delay calculation,
multi-beamforming, and coded excitation and compression). The
PUS-SOC was fabricated using a UMC 130-nm NAND process
and has 16.8 GFLOPS of computing power with a total equivalent
gate count of 12.1 million, which is comparable to a Pentium-4
CPU. The size and power consumption of the PUS-SOC are
and 1.2 W, respectively. Based on the PUS-SOC,
a prototype hand-held US imaging system was implemented.
Phantom experiments demonstrated that the PUS-SOC can pro-
vide appropriate image quality for point-of-care applications with
a compact PDA size ( ) and 3 hours of
battery life.
Index Terms—Application-speciﬁc integrated circuit, point-of-
care, portable ultrasound system, system-on-a-chip.
I. INTRODUCTION
ULTRASOUND (US) imaging is an essential tool in diag-
nostic medicine. It offers advantages over other medical
imaging modalities, providing real-time, non-invasive and cost-
Manuscript received December 01, 2014; revised March 11, 2015; accepted
May 04, 2015. This research was supported by the MSIP (Ministry of Science,
ICT and Future Planning), Korea , under the C-ITRC (Convergence Information
Technology Research Center) support program (NIPA-2014-H0401-14-1002)
supervised by the NIPA (National IT Industry Promotion Agency) and by the
R&D Program of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy-Korea Evalua-
tion Institute of Industrial Technology (grant MOTIE/KEIT 10048528, Devel-
opment of ICT-Based Wireless Ultrasound Solution for Point-of-Care Applica-
tions). This paper was recommended by Associate Editor G. Yuan. (J. Kang and
C. Yoon contributed equally to this work.)
J. Kang, J. Lee, S.-B. Kye, Y. Lee, J. H. Chang, and G.-D. Kim are with
the Department of Electronic Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul 121-742,
South Korea.
C. Yoon was with Sogang University, Seoul, 121-742, South Korea. He is now
with the Department of Bioengineering, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90089-1111 USA.
Y. Yoo and T.-k. Song are with the Department of Electrical Engineering
and Interdisciplinary Program of Integrated Biotechnology, Sogang University,
Seoul, 121-742, South Korea (e-mail: ymyoo@sogang.ac.kr; tksong@sogang.
ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TBCAS.2015.2431272
effective imaging with an easy-to-use, portable device [1]–[3].
Additionally, US imaging can provide data on the functional
mechanical properties of the human body, such as tissue stiff-
ness and blood ﬂow velocity [4]–[6]. The application of US
imaging in point-of-care diagnostics is expanding to support the
immediate diagnosis of disease, internal damage, and hemody-
namic conditions at the patient’s bedside, in ambulances, on
the battleﬁeld, and in emergency rooms using hand-held US
imaging systems [7]–[10].
For decades, research has been performed to develop efﬁ-
cient US imaging systems to reduce system hardware volume
and computational complexity while simultaneously providing
a programmability, ﬂexibility, and image quality comparable
to those of conventional, bulky US imaging systems. The
most recent research efforts have focused on using low-cost
programmable cores, such as ﬁeld-programmable gate arrays
(FPGAs) and digital signal processors (DSP). For example,
F. K. Schneider and A. Agarwal et al. proposed a fully pro-
grammable architecture for a US imaging system that used a
combination of a low-cost FPGA (Cyclone II 2C70F672, Altera
Corp., San Diego, CA, USA) and a DSP (TMS320C6416,
Texas Instruments Inc., TX, USA) to integrate a 32-channel
dynamic receive beamformer based on phase rotation and an
optimized two-stage demodulation ﬁlter [11]–[13]. However,
because the hybrid architecture barely meets the requirements
of conventional B-mode US imaging due to the limited data
transfer rate and computational throughput, additional ad-
vanced features, such as multi-beamforming (MBF) and coded
excitation and compression, which are common in modern US
imaging systems, could not be included.
Alternatively, G.-D. Kim et al. further minimized the system
footprint using a single low-cost FPGA (Spartan-3, Xilinx Inc.,
San Jose, CA, USA) in a laptop-type portable US imaging
system [14]. The FPGA core in the system provided all US
image processing, including transmit beamforming, dynamic
receive beamforming, mid-processing, and back-end pro-
cessing. Nevertheless, only 16 channels for the beamformers
could be integrated into the system due to the limited hardware
resources of the low-cost FPGA. Consequently, the image
quality, including the spatial and contrast resolution, was lower
than that of conventional US imaging systems, which com-
monly have over 32 channels. Additionally, the system could
not provide advanced imaging modes, such as color Doppler
imaging, due to the limited hardware resources.
1932-4545 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the developed PUS-SOC.
In this paper, we present a novel system-on-chip solution for
a portable US imaging system (PUS-SOC) that is compact and
has low power consumption. Additionally, it both supports the
essential ﬂexibility for US imaging (e.g., system scalability up
to 128 channels and on-board transmit and dynamic receive
delay calculations) and provides advanced imaging technolo-
gies (e.g., MBF, coded excitation and compression, dynamic
quadrature demodulation, frequency compounding, and color
Doppler processing).
II. METHODS
A. Functional Block Diagram for PUS-SOC
Fig. 1 shows a schematic diagram of the PUS-SOC. As
shown in Fig. 1, in the digital front-end, the US transmitter for
each channel is controlled by a transmit pulse generator (TxPG)
module, and analog-to-digital converted radio-frequency (RF)
data can be obtained from the analog front-end at a frequency
of up to 40 MHz. The RF data are fed into the dynamic re-
ceive beamformer (RxBF) module through the low-voltage
differential signaling block (LVDS) in the PUS-SOC and se-
quentially stored in RF memory. The RxBF module provides
up to 4 simultaneous scanlines; the module is based on a
post-fractional delay ﬁltering architecture composed of a shared
ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO) block, a selective summation block
(SSB), and a fractional delay ﬁltering block (FDF) [15]. The
beamformed results are sent to the mid-processor, which per-
forms direct current rejection ﬁltering (DCR), data decimation,
scanline accumulation (SLA), time-gain compensation (TGC),
digital quadrature demodulation (DQD), and baseband code
TABLE I
FUNCTIONAL SPECIFICATIONS OF THE PUS-SOC
compression (BCC). In the back-end processor, the in-phase
and quadrature data are back-processed for the conven-
tional B-mode imaging and color Doppler imaging modes. The
B-mode processing includes envelope detection (ED), log com-
pression (LC), fractional decimation (FD), spike-hole ﬁltering
(SHF), and multi-zone blending (MZB). Table I summarizes
the functional speciﬁcations of the PUS-SOC. The details of
operation for the PUS-SOC will be described in the following
sections.
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
KANG et al.: A SYSTEM-ON-CHIP SOLUTION FOR POINT-OF-CARE ULTRASOUND IMAGING SYSTEMS 3
B. Interface Overview
The PUS-SOC can be controlled using header- or reg-
ister-based interfaces. Each method controls its own dedicated
parameters, which are categorized according to the update
timing: register-based interfaces control such parameters as
the probe and scanline geometries for transmit and receive
beamforming and various ﬁlter coefﬁcients for the mid-pro-
cessing and Doppler processors that are required throughout
a frame. Because the register block contains a total of 1,442
bytes (224 in the TxPG module, 262 in the RxBF module,
416 in the mid-processor and back-end processor, and 540
in the Doppler processors), it requires high redundancy for
update. For instance, when requiring 3 clock cycles at 40 MHz
for a single command writing operation (i.e., 75 ns) with two
bytes of data bus width (i.e., 16 bits), approximately
is required to conduct a full re-conﬁguration of the PUS-SOC
(i.e., 1442 bytes/2 bytes 75 ns). The new parameters are
ﬁrst collected into a dummy register block and are not adjusted
during operation. The dummy and active register blocks are
switched if the update bit in the header packet is activated and
the current frame generation procedure has ended.
In contrast, the header interface determines the parameters
that must be updated between adjacent scanline generation pro-
cedures. This interface is required to support temporal manip-
ulation techniques (e.g., extended aperture (EA), pulse inver-
sion (PI), MZB, and spatial compounding). The header inter-
face sends 2-byte header packets through a dedicated path in the
PUS-SOC to the TxPG and RxBF modules; the RxBF module
packets are attached in front of the beamformed data and sent
to the mid-processor. The overall size of the headers can vary
from 8 to 166 packets (4–136 packets for the TxPG module and
4–30 packets for the RxBF module and the mid-processor) de-
pending on the operation of the respective modules.
C. Transmit Pulse Generator (TxPG) Module
During transmit pulse generation, the pulse driver on the
analog front-end should be controlled to focus the acoustic
beam to a desired depth. Additionally, the pulse shape and
sequence should be programmable to support advanced
imaging technologies (e.g., code excitation and broad beam
excitation for MBF method). To satisfy these requirements, a
programmable architecture is used for the 32-channel TxPG
module in the PUS-SOC, which enables the transmission of a
range of transmit aperture widths (1–32 channels) and bipolar
pulse lengths (4–128 clock cycles comprised of 2–64 clock
cycles each for the P- and N-cycles) at frequencies up to
80 MHz. This enables the generation of basic bipolar pulses
with transmit acoustic frequencies ranging from 0.625 MHz to
20 MHz when 128 and 4 clock cycles of bipolar pulse length
were employed, respectively. Additionally, pseudo-chirp and
barker-coded pulses can be transmitted at up to 32 cycles. The
operation sequence can be changed using one of two operating
modes: static mode or dynamic header mode. In static mode,
the TxPG module calculates the transmit focusing delay for
each channel and the total aperture size using the parameters
stored in a register block. The dynamic header mode uses the
information in the header packets to determine the transmit
focusing delay and aperture size. The dynamic mode can
Fig. 2. Dynamic receive beamforming for US imaging.
support transmit beamforming using a larger aperture than the
static mode (i.e., up to four PUS-SOCs can be used). However,
it should be noted that the dynamic mode requires more
header packets for each scanline generation, where is the
number of PUS-SOCs employed.
D. Dynamic Receive Beamformer (RxBF) Module
For the dynamic receive beamforming, the focusing delay
to the th channel of the array transducer should
be dynamically compensated for the th focusing point
as shown in Fig. 2, where is the total number of channels.
However, it is a signiﬁcant computational burden for hand-held
US imaging systems to calculate the full dynamic delays due to
the limited hardware resources of hand-held systems [16]–[18].
1) Pseudo-Dynamic Delay Calculation: The dynamic re-
ceive beamforming in the PUS-SOC was implemented using
the previously-proposed pseudo-dynamic delay calculation
method [19], which combines a shared delay calculator with
bilinear delay interpolator (BDI) blocks of the respective
channels. Fig. 3(a) shows the delay update pattern for receive
focusing using the conventional delay calculation method, in
which the dynamic delays are fully calculated for each channel,
and the proposed pseudo-dynamic delay calculation method
using a shared delay calculator with BDI blocks. As shown
in the ﬁgure, the dynamic focusing delay can be calculated
for all channels using fewer calculators using the proposed
method with BDI block. Fig. 3(b), a single shared delay cal-
culator derives the focusing delays for all channels in rotation
(i.e., ), and the uncalculated focusing points for each
channel are then interpolated using a dedicated BDI block.
More speciﬁcally, the BDI block ﬁrst calculates the two delay
slopes (i.e., and )
using the adjacent three calculated focusing delays (i.e.,
, , and ) and then interpolates the dynamic
focusing delays between the th and the th focusing
points as follows:
(1a)
(1b)
is the index ranging from 1 to and and are the com-
pounding coefﬁcients for and
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS
Fig. 3. (a) Delay update patterns for receive focusing using the conventional
and proposed methods using a shared delay calculator with the BDI blocks.
(b) Detailed schematic diagram of the BDI block.
, respectively, for the th interpolating point. As a re-
sult, as shown in Fig. 3(b), each BDI block consists of 6 adders,
2 multipliers, 5 registers, and two 2:1 multiplexers for delay
latching, slope calculation, and compounding, which are signif-
icantly fewer in number than those required for the delay calcu-
lator requiring complex square root operation [20].
In the PUS-SOC, the focusing delay is divided into a coarse
delay and a ﬁne delay, and , respectively, to obtain
16- resolution in the delay compensation. The coarse delay
resolution is the time interval between sampling events, and the
ﬁne delay resolution is four fractions (i.e., 0, 0.25, 0.50, and
0.75) of the total interval. Additionally, 4 sets of 32 BDIs each,
fed by 4 shared delay calculators, are embedded to support up
to 4 simultaneous scanline generation procedures.
2) Multi-Beamforming Method Based on a Shared FIFO
Block: In the PUS-SOC, an MBF method based on a shared
FIFO block supporting single-, dual-, and quad-beamforming
is implemented in a dynamic receive beamforming architec-
ture based on post-fractional ﬁltering [15], [21]. The MBF
method can produce multiple scanlines simultaneously without
reducing the beamforming frequency, unlike the conventional
time-sharing MBF method [22]. Fig. 4(a) shows a schematic
diagram of the shared FIFO block, which collects an extended
number of sequential RF data samples larger than the length of
FDF (i.e., ), where is the length of the
FDF [e.g., 5 in Fig. 4(a) arbitrarily for concise presentation]. In
PUS-SOC, was set to 8. Note that addresses
a RF data sample in a RF memory for every focusing point
Fig. 4. Schematic diagrams of the proposed MBF method based on a shared
FIFO block. (a) Shared FIFO block. (b) Multi-beam delay controller.
while making the FDF causal for block data sets by consid-
ering (i.e., ). The shared FIFO block enables the
parallel generation of the block data sets corresponding to the
multi-scanline paths using the respective differences of the
multi-scanline delays (i.e., ) from their maximum (i.e.,
). These differences are calculated from the
multi-beam delay controller shown in Fig. 4(b).
, the length of the shared FIFO block, is determined
by evaluating the worst case for the difference in delay between
multiple scanlines, which is given by
(2)
where is the maximum value among and
and are the operator deriving the maximum
value within entire channels and a frame, respectively.
In our PUS-SOC, a 128-channel phased array transducer with
a center frequency of 3.5 MHz is examined as a worst case of
4 simultaneous multi-scanline generation procedures (i.e., 32
transmissions and 128 scanline generations) with a 90 viewing
angle, 30-cm focusing depth, and 0.2968-mm element pitch. Be-
cause the phased array has a diverging geometry between adja-
cent scanlines, is greatest at the side channels [21].
Based on this evaluation, is chosen to be 22, making
the total size of the shared FIFO block 1.58 kB (i.e., 18 bits
22 shared FIFO cells 32 channels) in the PUS-SOC. Note
that the 18-bit input data sample contains the apodized RF data,
composed of 12 signed bits of RF data and 6 unsigned bits of
apodization window coefﬁcients.
3) Chip Extension: To obtain a larger aperture size over 32
channels, the beamformed results from up to four PUS-SOCs
can be aggregated (i.e., 64, 96, and 128 channels). As shown
in Fig. 1, each PUS-SOC can provide 32 channels of receive
beamformed data to the internal mid-processor or to other PUS-
SOCs. Fig. 5 shows a summing chain of beamformed data be-
tween PUS-SOCs, in which beamformed data from previous
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
KANG et al.: A SYSTEM-ON-CHIP SOLUTION FOR POINT-OF-CARE ULTRASOUND IMAGING SYSTEMS 5
Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of a summing chain for chip extension, with up to
4 PUS-SOCs.
PUS-SOCs can be added to the current data, with the speciﬁed
latency controlled by a chip index to produce a summing latency
of a single clock cycle across the PUS-SOCs.
4) Channel Ordering: Commercial linear- and convex-array
transducers conventionally have 128 channels or more, but
portable US imaging systems generally have fewer than 32
channels due to their limited hardware complexity (e.g., 16–32
channels). Consequently, direct receive beamforming from the
input channel data is not feasible. To resolve this problem,
portable US systems are required to continually change the
pairing between the active elements and channels of the RxBF
module corresponding to a current scanline. The developed
PUS-SOC supports the rearrangement of channels using the
internal channel ordering (CO) block or header ordering mode.
As shown in Fig. 1, the parallelized RF data in the LVDS
block are fed into the CO block, which rearranges the RF data
samples in the channel direction for matching using internal
channel multiplexers corresponding to the scanline information
on a header packet. Additionally, the CO block is designed to
support the EA technique, which improves the spatial resolution
by temporally broadening the receive aperture; this technique
is supported well internally for a single PUS-SOC [9], [14].
However, in the case of multiple PUS-SOCs, header ordering
mode should be used because the CO block does not support
this capability. In header ordering mode, 6 bits are required for
each channel (5 bits to deﬁne the position in 32 channels and
1 bit for channel on/off masking). Thus, 13 header packets are
required for each PUS-SOC.
E. Mid-Processing
A schematic diagram of the mid-processing unit of the
PUS-SOC is shown in Fig. 1 following the digital front-end
component; the unit includes DCR, SLA, TGC, and BCC
blocks.
1) Direct Current Rejection Filtering: In the DCR block,
a two-stage ﬁnite impulse response (FIR) ﬁlter (e.g., a high-
pass and a low-pass ﬁlter) with 16-bit coefﬁcient resolution is
used to suppress noise. First, a 33-tap high-pass ﬁlter is used to
cancel undesired noise and DC components from the transducer
and the analog-to-digital converter (ADC) [23]. Decimation is
then performed using a 33-tap low-pass ﬁlter (LPF) to avoid
aliasing, thereby reducing the necessary data rate for efﬁcient
MBF processing. In the developed system, the decimation factor
Fig. 6. Block diagram of the dynamic quadrature demodulator (DQD) with
(a) post-compression using RF data and (b) the proposed post-compression
method using baseband data.
(e.g., 1, 2, and 4) is varied according to the imaging depth, and
the ﬁlter coefﬁcients are updated by the host interface.
2) Scanline Accumulator: Two or four sequentially received
beamformed RF data channels with 18-bit resolution produced
using the EA and/or PI techniques are accumulated in the SLA
block. In this block, four parallel scanlines generated from the
MBF at a 40 MHz rate are stored in the 4 FIFO buffers, and
each scanline is read out successively at an 80 MHz rate; there-
fore, four parallel scanlines can be rearranged into one sequen-
tial vector line when the decimation factor is greater than two.
The SLA block thus enables the US system to support harmonic
imaging processes based on the MBF method and EA and PI
techniques with one functional block in the subsequent stage,
e.g., DQD, ED, or LC processing. Consequently, the SLA block
can be implemented using four 5120 20 bit FIFOs for B-mode
dual-beam operation or four 5120 18 bit FIFOs for C-mode
quad-beam processing. Note that the width of the B-mode FIFO
is 20 bits to preserve the bit resolution when performing both the
EA and PI techniques.
3) Time Gain Compensator: A TGC is used to compensate
the attenuation of the US waves stemming from both absorp-
tion and scattering during propagation through a medium [24].
To compensate the changes in amplitude of the US waves, the
imaging depth is divided into 8 zones along the imaging depth,
and the individual linear gain increment is computed from a
user-deﬁned TGC gain for each zone, which is provided by the
host interface. Additionally, a different gain can be used for each
scanline to compensate the lateral amplitude variation due to the
MBF processing and the loss of signal energy in the near ﬁeld
due to the EA technique.
4) Dynamic Quadrature Demodulation: The RF data
envelope is calculated from complex baseband data ob-
tained by quadrature demodulation, which is performed using
down-mixing and a subsequent LPF. In the down-mixing
process, sine and cosine waveforms are stored in a look-up
table (LUT). In the developed system, a 640-byte LUT is used
to store one period of 125-kHz sine and cosine waveforms sam-
pled at 40 MHz; therefore, the total LUT size is 2.56 kB (640
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS
Fig. 7. Overall block diagram representing color Doppler processing for US C-mode imaging.
bytes 4 LUT) to support frequency compounding with two
sub-bands. Using this LUT, multiples of the 125 kHz sinusoidal
waveform ranging from 125 kHz to 20 MHz can be generated
by changing the address increment; for example, 5-MHz cosine
and sine waveforms can be obtained by setting the address
increment to 32 . With this approach,
DQD processing can be achieved by dynamically changing the
address increment over the depth. In the design, the maximum
imaging depth (i.e., 300 mm) is divided into 32 zones.
5) Baseband Code Compression: In the LPF, a two-stage FIR
ﬁlter with 16-bit coefﬁcient resolution is used. First, a 65-tap
polyphase ﬁlter, , is used to reject the component
and provide decimation with a factor of 1, 2, or 4; therefore,
260-tap ﬁlter coefﬁcients are used when the decimation factor
is four.
Additionally, pulse compression is performed using a ﬁlter
with coefﬁcients obtained by convolution with the coefﬁcients
of the LPF. Fig. 6(a) and (b) shows conventional post-compres-
sion using RF data [24] and the proposed methods using base-
band data [25], where is the down-sampling factor,
is the beamformed signal from the TGC block, and
is the decoding ﬁlter for pulse compression. In our PUS-SOC,
LPF and pulse compression are performed simultaneously with
one functional block by convolving each poly-phase coefﬁcient
subset of with the baseband decoding ﬁlter
given by
(3)
Using this approach, pulse durations for coded excitation of up
to can be efﬁciently compressed using a 65-tap ﬁlter be-
cause the decimation in the DCR and DQD reduces the data rate
by a factor of 16. Therefore, a mismatched decoding ﬁlter with
a longer sequence can be used to reduce the sidelobe level of
the pulse-compressed signal in Barker coded excitation [26].
The subsequent 65-tap dynamic LPFs (i.e., ), in
which the ﬁlter cutoff frequencies are dynamically changed
according to the imaging depth, which is divided into 32 zones,
reject high-frequency noise due to the frequency-dependent
attenuation that reduces the bandwidth of the echo signal [27].
F. Back-End Processing
The overall block diagram for the back-end processing for
B-mode US imaging is shown in Fig. 1 following the mid-pro-
cessing component. To extract the envelope of the echo signal,
envelope detection is applied to the complex baseband data from
two sub-bands. These two envelope signals are added using
TABLE II
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE COLOR DOPPLER PROCESSOR OF THE PUS-SOC
weighting factors of and ; this process is called frequency
compounding and is used to mitigate speckle noise [28]. The
weighting factors can be determined by analyzing the spectrum
of the received echo signal or by calculating the energy loss with
a known frequency-dependent attenuation coefﬁcient [29], [30].
After the two envelope signals are summed, log compression
is performed to reduce the dynamic range of the US envelope
signal. Additionally, fractional decimation is performed to re-
duce the data rate (e.g., to 1024 samples per scanline), and image
enhancement (e.g., using spike and hole ﬁlters) and multi-zone
blending are also applied as shown in Fig. 1.
G. Color Doppler Processor
The overall block diagram for the color Doppler processor is
shown in Fig. 7. The speciﬁcations for the color Doppler pro-
cessing used in the PUS-SOC are summarized in Table II. For
the color Doppler processing, the receive beamforming and sub-
sequent signal processing (e.g., DCR, TGC, and DQD) are con-
ducted within a region of interest. In the developed system, the
decimation ratios in the DCR and DQD in the mid-processor are
determined by the size of the region of interest, and fractional
decimation is performed in the color Doppler processor to re-
duce the data rate (e.g., to 512 samples per scanline). Spike and
hole ﬁlters are then used to remove unwanted noise.
The complex baseband in-phase, , and quadrature, , data
are ﬁrst reshaped along the ensemble axis. In the color data re-
shaping (CDR) module, a programmable synchronous dynamic
random-access memory (SDRAM) controller is embedded.
The 16-bit in-phase and quadrature signals are concatenated
into 32-bit data and stored in one SDRAM; therefore, two
32-bit SDRAMs operating in a ping-pong mode are required
to reshape the complex baseband data. Clutter rejection is
performed on the reshaped data to extract the Doppler signal.
Of the available clutter ﬁlters, projection-initialized inﬁnite
impulse response and polynomial regression ﬁlters are typically
used because of their desirable characteristics, such as a narrow
transition bandwidth and a high stop-band suppression ratio
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
KANG et al.: A SYSTEM-ON-CHIP SOLUTION FOR POINT-OF-CARE ULTRASOUND IMAGING SYSTEMS 7
TABLE III
ESTIMATED GATE COUNTS FOR EACH BLOCK OF THE PUS-SOC
[31], [32]. These ﬁlters can be expressed in a matrix form
derived from a state space formulation [32]. In the design, to
support an ensemble length of up to 16, the clutter rejection
ﬁlter is implemented with 16 multiplies and a 512-byte LUT,
whose ﬁlter coefﬁcients are computed and updated by the host
interface.
In the auto-correlation method, the estimation of the complex
correlation with a lag from the baseband complex data after
clutter rejection, , is obtained from
(4)
where indicates the complex conjugate and is the en-
semble size. From (4), the instantaneous Doppler frequency can
be calculated from
(5)
where is the pulse repetition frequency. From the auto-
correlation calculated using lags of zero and one, the power
and variance of the Doppler signal can be obtained from
(6)
(7)
III. RESULTS
A. ASIC Fabrication
Table III shows the gate counts for the PUS-SOC estimated
using the UMC 130-nm complementary metal—oxide—semi-
conductor (CMOS) standard core cell library of the Code Com-
piler synthesis tool (Synopsis Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA),
assuming an operating clock speed of 40 MHz. As shown in
Table III, the dynamic receive beamformer and mid/back-end
processing possess most of the gate counts (46.5% and 46.8%,
respectively). Meanwhile, the color Doppler and other compo-
nents (e.g., TxPG and interfaces) possess 3.0% and 3.6% of
the gate counts, respectively. As a result, the total equivalent
gate count is 12.1 million, which is comparable to a Pentium
4 CPU. The circuits provide 16.8 GFLOPS of concurrent com-
puting power.
Fig. 8. Developed PUS-SOC. (a) External appearance. (b) Internal layout.
TABLE IV
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE PUS-SOC
Fig. 8(a) and (b) show the external appearance and internal
layout, respectively, of the developed PUS-SOC. Table IV sum-
marizes the speciﬁcations of the developed PUS-SOC: the di-
mension is and the power consumption is 1.2 W,
which is suitable for embedding into the portable US imaging
system.
B. Evaluation of New Algorithms in PUS-SOC
Various new algorithms were embedded in PUS-SOC. In par-
ticular, pseudo-dynamic delay calculations using a BDI block
and the MBF method based on a shared FIFO block, which
can reduce computational complexity in dynamic receive beam-
forming, were adopted [19], [21]. The pseudo-dynamic delay
calculation method using BDI blocks demonstrated an image
quality comparable to the conventional full-delay calculation
method while providing a ten-fold reduction of the hardware
utilization ratio in the dynamic receive beamforming (i.e., 3.9%
versus 39.0%) [19]. In addition, the MBF method based on a
shared FIFO block not only improved the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) and contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) by 4.7 dB and 0.9, re-
spectively, but also provided a hardware complexity comparable
to the time-sharing MBF method (i.e., 11,757K versus 11,178K
in equivalent gate counts) [21]. Note that the hardware scale
required for the MBF method is 32.6% lower than that of the
conventional MBF method with duplicated beamforming paths
(i.e., 17,444K). Therefore, the PUS-SOC can conduct full dy-
namic receive beamforming with a generation capability of up
to four simultaneous scanlines with signiﬁcantly reduced hard-
ware complexity.
On the other hand, when utilizing multiple PUS-SOCs at the
same time with the chip extension feature (i.e., ), the
effective channel of a PUS-SOC can be multiplied, which
can improve the spatial resolution and SNR, as the spatial res-
olution in the lateral direction can be approximated by ,
where is the wavelength, is the depth of focusing, and
is the aperture size proportional to [14]. In addition, the rel-
ative SNR in US imaging can be proportionally improved by
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS
a factor of , where and are the number of ef-
fective transmit and receive channels, respectively. Therefore,
a time improvement in SNR is expected when using fully
extended transmit and receive apertures [33]. Otherwise, with a
chip extended conﬁguration, a US imaging system admittedly
requires more power to drive multiple PUS-SOCs. However, it
will not be directly proportional to because the mid/back-end
and color Doppler processor modules are only activated in a
PUS-SOC last in the summing chain, which generates a fully
beamformed result of the extended conﬁguration. Therefore, an
additional 1.5 and 2.5 times the power consumption for logic
toggling would be required.
C. Comparative Evaluation With the FPGA Approach
To compare the proposed ASIC approach with an FPGA
approach, the PUS-SOC core was embedded into a state-of-art
Xilinx FPGA product (Xilinx, Inc., San Jose, CA, USA).
The PUS-SOC was synthesized using the Xilinx Synthesize
Technology (XST) tool in the Xilinx ISE™ software suite 13.4.
From the synthesis, the PUS-SOC utilizes 313,081 of slice
registers, 346,390 of lice LUTs, 408 of bounded IOBs, 3,183 of
memory (i.e., RAM and shift registers), 12 of BUFG/BUFGC-
TRLs, and 857 of DSP48E1s, which is equal to 42%, 96%,
48%, 4%, 37% and 68%, respectively, of the hardware re-
sources available in the considered top-tier FPGA chip, i.e., a
Virtex-7 XC7V585T with the FFG1761 package manufactured
by 28-nm process technology. The one-step-lower version of
the Vertex-7 FPGA (i.e., XC7VX550T) failed to implement
the PUS-SOC core due to 103% of the slice LUTs being
over-mapped. Therefore, undoubtedly, low-cost FPGAs, such
as the Spartan-6 manufactured by 45-nm process technology,
cannot be used for PUS-SOC because even the largest device
(i.e., XC6SLX150) can only provide 26.6% of the logic cells
provided by the XC7V585T device.
In addition, the power consumption of PUS-SOC with the
FPGA approach was analyzed with the XC7V585T FPGA chip
using Xilinx Power Estimator (XPE) software (Xilinx Inc.) by
assuming single beamforming. Furthermore, a 40 MHz clock
only was assumed to be provided to all the I/O and logics
with a 25% toggle rate at a ambient temperature. The
I/O consisted of 32 low-voltage differential signal (LVDS)
pairs and 369 low-voltage CMOS (LVCMOS) pins (37 inputs,
130 outputs, and 202 bidirectionals). The FPGA approach for
PUS-SOC required 2.5 W of total on-chip power consumption,
which is approximately double that of our ASIC approach. In
detail, dynamic power consumes the largest proportion of the
power (i.e., 1,985 mW versus 157 mW and 342 mW for I/O
and static power consumption, respectively), of which 68.5%
is contributed by logic toggling and 31.5% by clock. Further-
more, this power consumption analysis for the FPGA-based
PUS-SOC indirectly gives an estimation of the relative power
breakdown in the ASIC approach, as shown in Fig. 9, by
considering the module-level gate population in Table III.
Moreover, the dimension of the Virtex-7 XC7V585T chip
with the FFG1761 package is [34], which is
larger than that of our ASIC approach (i.e., ) be-
cause there should be redundant hardware resources embedded
in an FPGA for PUS-SOC. Moreover, as generally accepted,
Fig. 9. Estimated power consumption breakdown graph of the PUS-SOC.
the ASIC approach for implementing PUS-SOC provides lower
unit costs than FPGA in the case of large production, which is
also encouraged by the proposed chip extension feature for a
one-for-all solution in establishing broad product segments of
US imaging systems. Therefore, it can be concluded that our
ASIC approach is superior to the state-of-art FPGA approach in
terms of power consumption, area, and cost-effectiveness.
D. Prototype Hand-Held US Imaging System Implementation
To demonstrate the performance of the PUS-SOC, a proto-
type hand-held US imaging system was implemented. Fig. 10
and Table V show the schematic diagram and the physical spec-
iﬁcations, respectively, for the hand-held US imaging system
developed using the PUS-SOC. In the system implementation,
a single PUS-SOC transmits and receives the US signal through
a 32-channel analog front-end, which includes ADCs (AD9279,
Analog Device Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA), pulsers and corre-
sponding pulser drivers (TC7320 and MD1810, Supertex Inc.,
Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The DSP processor (TMS320C6416,
Texas Instruments, TX, USA) used in the system performs dig-
ital scanline conversion and image formation for the different
modes (i.e., B/C/D). The data are sent from the DSP to a mobile
CPU processor (S3C6410, Samsung Electronics Inc., Seoul,
Korea) and displayed on a 7” TFT LCD touch panel with an
800 480 pixel resolution. The mobile CPU processor controls
the operation of the PUS-SOC and the peripherals, such as the
USB 2.0 and local area network (LAN) interfaces. The FPGA
interface (Virtex-4 XC4 VLX160, Xilinx, Inc., San Jose, CA,
USA) mediates between the controller (i.e., the mobile CPU
processor) and the operation cores (i.e., the PUS-SOC and the
DSP processor). Power is supplied by a custom-built 6-cell
11.1-V lithium polymer battery with 1350 mAh of capacity or
an external power source. The power module implemented in
the prototype system extracts various voltages, including a high
voltage of up to , for transmission.
Fig. 11(a),(b), and (c) shows the front- and back-end board
layouts and the external appearance of the prototype hand-held
US imaging system. As shown in the ﬁgure, the front-end board
includes the PUS-SOC and the ADCs on a front panel, and the
pulsers and their drivers are implemented on a back panel. Ad-
ditionally, the back-end board contains the mobile CPU pro-
cessor, interface FPGA, and DSP processor on the front panel
and is connected to the front-end board through connectors on
the back panel. The resulting integrated board is enclosed by
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
KANG et al.: A SYSTEM-ON-CHIP SOLUTION FOR POINT-OF-CARE ULTRASOUND IMAGING SYSTEMS 9
Fig. 10. Schematic diagram of the prototype hand-held US imaging system based on the PUS-SOC.
TABLE V
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE HAND-HELD US IMAGING SYSTEM BASED ON THE
PUS-SOC
the shell shown in Fig. 11(c), whose overall size and weight are
and approximately 700 g, respectively.
Additionally, the maximum frame rate and estimated battery life
are 30 fps and 3 h, respectively. Note that the design of the front
and back panels shown in Fig. 11(a) and (b) originates from our
previous FPGA-based prototype in [9] such that the external
shell in Fig. 11(c) is shared by both designs.
To demonstrate the performance of the prototype hand-held
US imaging system, phantom experiments were conducted
on a tissue-mimicking phantom (Model 539 Multipurpose
US Phantom, ATS Laboratories, Inc., Bridgeport, CT, USA).
For the experiments, a 64-element custom-built phased array
transducer with a center frequency of 3 MHz was employed.
Fig. 12 shows the US images of the prototype hand-held US
imaging system overlaid on a graphical user interface for the
corresponding ﬁelds-of-view in the tissue-mimicking phantom
targeting wire, hyperechoic mass, and hypoechoic cystic re-
gions. The transmit focusing was on a 4-cm depth with an 8-cm
overall imaging depth, and the gain and dynamic range for the
images were 55% and 50 dB, respectively. As shown in the
Fig. 12, the wire, hyperechoic mass, and hypoechoic cystic
regions of the tissue-mimicking phantom could be observed
using the prototype US imaging system.
Fig. 11. Prototype hand-held US imaging system based on the PUS-SOC.
(a) Front-end board. (b) Back-end board. (c) External appearance of the
prototype system.
IV. DISCUSSION
In summary, the proposed system-on-chip solution (i.e., PUS-
SOC) for a portable US imaging system can support the entire
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS
Fig. 12. Phantom experimental results implemented on the developed GUI: the
geometry of the tissue-mimicking phantom and its ﬁelds-of-view targeting the
wire, hyperechoic mass, and hypoechoic cystic regions.
B-mode processing along with the advanced imaging tech-
niques (i.e., pseudo-dynamic receive beamforming, MBF,
EA technique, frequency compounding, harmonic imaging,
code excitation and baseband compression, and multi-zone
focusing) as well as the Doppler processing while demon-
strating low power consumption and high area-efﬁciency. Due
to these advantages, the PUS-SOC becomes more valuable in
implementing a portable US imaging system for point-of-care
applications in which low power consumption, small volume,
and light weight are necessary for enhanced user experience
in terms of battery life and portability. Furthermore, the ap-
plication of the PUS-SOC can be further extended beyond
point-of-care use, as it is capable of supporting a 128-channel
RF system by utilizing multiple PUS-SOCs due to its advanced
scalability. In other words, depending on the application, the
proposed PUC-SOC can be adopted for various manufacturers
willing to use the PUS-SOC for broad product segments
ranging from the portable to high-end US imaging systems.
With the PUS-SOC, our future works will ﬁrst focus on the
further stabilization of the current prototype US imaging system
to access all of the features integrated in the PUS-SOC that have
not been fully explored. On the other hand, we are working
on designing the next generation of the PUS-SOC. In this next
generation, use of state-of-art technology in CMOS processes
under 20 nm in ASIC implementation will further optimize the
chip area, reducing the area to less than . Fur-
thermore, the reduction of the total equivalent gate counts, es-
pecially for the RxBF and mid/back processor modules, which
correspond to 46.5% and 46.8%, respectively, of the gate counts
in the overall PUS-SOC, will accelerate the reduction in the chip
area. Regarding power consumption, it is necessary to reduce
the overall power dissipation, currently 1.2 W, to improve the
battery life of portable US imaging systems. In particular, as an-
alyzed in Fig. 9, the dynamic power consumption is the largest
contributor to the power required to drive a PUS-SOC (i.e.,
79.8%). Thus, we will continue to develop more efﬁcient archi-
tectures and algorithms for a further reduction in logic size, es-
pecially for RxBF and mid/back-end processor modules, which
consume 25.4% and 25.6%, respectively, of the overall power
in the current PUS-SOC design.
Concerning the embedded features of PUS-SOC, the current
PUS-SOC can only control the bipolar pulse transmission;
thus, pulse compression methods using arbitrary pulses (e.g.,
chirp) cannot be supported [35]. This issue creates the need for
a multi-level pulse control for PUS-SOC to increase the SNR
and further improve the power-efﬁciency using the optimized
transmit pulse-shaping strategy as well [36]. In addition, re-
cently proposed advanced imaging modes, such as elastography
and vector ﬂow imaging using plane-wave beamforming [37],
[38], are not supported in the current PUS-SOC design due to
the limited number of MBF paths (i.e., four). Therefore, more
efﬁcient and ﬂexible architectures supporting an extended MBF
may be required for realizing the next generation of PUS-SOC
while preserving its size and power consumption.
Going beyond the conventional cross-sectional 2D US
imaging is another important issue in the revision of the
PUS-SOC, which could provide a breakthrough in terms of
satisfying the needs of a system-on-chip solution. In particular,
the PUS-SOC has a potential to be an area- and power-efﬁcient
solution for 3D real-time volumetric imaging using a 2-dimen-
sional array transducer, such as a capacitive micro-machined
ultrasonic transducer (CMUT) [5], [39]. However, previously
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
KANG et al.: A SYSTEM-ON-CHIP SOLUTION FOR POINT-OF-CARE ULTRASOUND IMAGING SYSTEMS 11
proposed volumetric beamforming architectures [40], [41]
require extended MBF as well; thus, further improvement of
the current PUS-SOC is necessary.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a compact and integrative
PUS-SOC for portable US imaging systems, which can pro-
vide 16.8 GFLOPS with dimensions of only
and a power consumption of only 1.2 W while supporting
advanced imaging techniques. In addition, the system scale can
be increased by a factor of 4 by using multiple PUS-SOCs.
Therefore, we believe that the PUS-SOC can be effective for
implementing various types of US imaging systems, especially
on a portable scale for point-of-care diagnostic applications.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Maccovski, Medical Imaging Systems. Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
USA: Prentice-Hall, 1983.
[2] T. K. Song and S. B. Park, “A new digital phased array system for
dynamic focusing and steering with reduced sampling rate,” Ultrason.
Imaging, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 1990.
[3] I. Kim, H. Kim, F. Griggio, R. L. Tutwiler, T. N. Jackson, S. T. McK-
instry, and K. Choi, “CMOS ultrasound transceiver chip for high-res-
olution ultrasonic imaging systems,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits
Syst., vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 293–303, 2009.
[4] J. Ophir, I. Cespedes, H. Ponnekanti, Y. Yazdi, and X. Li, “Elastog-
raphy: a squantitative method for imaging the elasticity of biological
tissues,” Ultrason. Imaging, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 111–134, 1991.
[5] M. Wang and J. Chen, “Volumetric ﬂow measurement using an im-
plantable CMUT array,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 5,
no. 3, pp. 214–222, 2011.
[6] Y. Yoo, R. Managuli, and Y. Kim, “Adaptive clutter ﬁltering for ultra-
sound color ﬂow imaging,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 29, no. 9, pp.
1311–1320, 2003.
[7] C. L. Moore and J. A. Copel, “Point-of-Care ultrasonography,” New
Eng. J. Med., vol. 364, no. 8, pp. 749–757, 2011.
[8] J.-J. Hwang, J. Quistgaard, J. Souquet, and L. A. Crum, “Portable ul-
trasound device for battleﬁeld trauma,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp.,
1998.
[9] S.-W. Yang, H.-C. Yoon, J. Cho, S.-B. Kye, and T.-K. Song, “A mobile
medical device for point-of-care applications,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason.
Symp., 2008, pp. 1346–1349.
[10] A. Agarwal, T. Fukuoka, F. K. Schneider, Y. Yoo, F. Baluyot, and Y.
Kim, “Single-chip solution for ultrasound imaging systems: Initial re-
sults,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp., 2007, pp. 1563–1566.
[11] F. K. Schneider, Y. Yoo, A. Agarwal, L. M. Koh, and Y. Kim, “New de-
modulation ﬁlter in digital phase rotation beamforming,” Ultrasonics,
vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 265–271, 2006.
[12] A. Agarwal, Y. Yoo, F. K. Schneider, G. Changqing, K. L. Mong,
and K. Yongmin, “New demodulation method for efﬁcient phase-rota-
tion-based beamforming,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq.
Control, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1656–1668, 2007.
[13] F. K. Schneider, A. Agarwal, Y. M. Yoo, T. Fukuoka, and Y. Kim, “A
fully programmable computing architecture for medical ultrasound ma-
chines,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 538–540,
2010.
[14] G. D. Kim, C. Yoon, S. B. Kye, Y. Lee, J. Kang, Y. Yoo, and T.-K.
Song, “A single FPGA-based portable ultrasound imaging system for
point-of-care applications,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq.
Control, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 1386–1394, 2012.
[15] J. Cho, J.-Y. Lee, J.-H. Song, Y. Kim, and T.-K. Song, “A fractional
ﬁlter-based beamformer architecture using postﬁltering approach to
minimize hardware complexity,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr.,
Freq. Control, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1076–1079, 2007.
[16] R. Mucci, “A comparison of efﬁcient beamforming algorithms,” IEEE
Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 548–558,
1984.
[17] O. D. Grace and S. P. Pitt, “Sampling and interpolation of bandlimited
signals by quadrature methods,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 48, pp.
1311–1318, 1970.
[18] B. D. Steinberg, “Digital beamforming in ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Ul-
trason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 716–721, 1992.
[19] H.-Y. Sohn, J. Kang, J. Cho, T.-K. Song, and Y. Yoo, “Time-sharing bi-
linear delay interpolation for ultrasound dynamic receive beamformer,”
Electron Lett., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 89–91, 2011.
[20] F. De Dinechin et al., “Multiplicative square root algorithms for
FPGAs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Field Programmable Logic and
Applicant., 2010, pp. 574–577.
[21] J. Kang, G.-D. Kim, C. Yoon, Y. Yoo, and T.-K. Song, “The new efﬁ-
cient multi-beamforming method based on multi-access register block
on a post-fractional ﬁltering architecture,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 7968, Mar.
26, 2011, 796815.
[22] J. Kim, L. X. Yao, and Z. Banjanin, “Multi-Beam Digital Beamforming
Method and Apparatus,” U.S. Patent 5 544 128, Aug. 6, 1996.
[23] J. H. Chang, L. Sun, J. T. Yen, and K. K. Shung, “Low-cost, high-speed
back-end processing system for high-frequency ultrasound B-mode
imaging,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 56,
no. 7, pp. 1490–1497, 2009.
[24] K. K. Shung, Diagnostic Ultrasound: Imaging and Blood Flow Mea-
surements. Boca Raton, FL, USA: Taylor and Francis, 2005.
[25] C. Yoon, W. Lee, J. H. Chang, T.-K. Song, and Y. Yoo, “An efﬁcient
pulse compression method of chirp-coded excitation in medical ultra-
sound imaging,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control,
vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2225–2229, 2013.
[26] N. Levanon, “Cross-correlation of long binary signals with longer mis-
matched ﬁlters,” IEEE Proc.-Radar Sonar Nav., vol. 152, pp. 377–382,
2005.
[27] D.-Y. Lee, Y. Yoo, T.-K. Song, and J. H. Chang, “Adaptive dynamic
quadrature demodulation with autoregressive spectral estimation in ul-
trasound imaging,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 7, no. 4, pp.
371–378, 2011.
[28] J. H. Chang, H. H. Kim, J. Lee, and K. K. Shung, “Frequency com-
pounded imaging with a high-frequency dual element transducer,” Ul-
trasonics, vol. 50, pp. 453–457, 2010.
[29] I. Song, C. Yoon, G. Kim, Y. Yoo, and J. Chang, “Adaptive frequency
compounding for speckle reduction,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp.,
2011, pp. 1435–1438.
[30] Y. Erez, Y. Y. Schechner, and D. Adam, “Space variant ultrasound
frequency compounding based on noise characteristics,” Ultrasound
Med. Biol., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 981–1000, 2008.
[31] Y. Yoo, S. Sikdar, K. Karadayi, O. Kolokythas, and Y. Kim, “Adaptive
clutter rejection for 3D color Doppler imaging: preliminary clinical
study,” Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 1221–1231, 2008.
[32] S. Bjærum, H. Torp, and K. Kristoffersen, “Clutter ﬁlter design for
ultrasound color ﬂow imaging,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr.,
Freq. Control, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 204–216, 2002.
[33] G. R. Lockwood, J. R. Talman, and S. S. Brunke, “Real-time 3-D
ultrasound imaging using sparse synthetic aperture beamforming,”
IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq. Control, vol. 45, no. 4, pp.
980–988, 1998.
[34] 7-Series FPGAs Packaging and Pinout: Product Speciﬁcations. San
Jose, CA, USA: Xilinx Inc., 2014.
[35] J. Song, S. Kim, H. Y. Sohn, T. K. Song, and Y. Yoo, “Coded excitation
for ultrasound tissue harmonic imaging,” Ultrasonics, vol. 50, no. 6,
pp. 613–619, 2010.
[36] K. Chen, H. S. Lee, A. P. Chandrakasan, and C. G. Sodini, “Ultra-
sonic imaging transceiver design for CMUT: a three-level
pulse-shaping pulser with improved efﬁciency and a noise-optimized
receiver,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 2734–2745,
2013.
[37] G. Montaldo, M. Tanter, J. Bercoff, N. Benech, and M. Fink, “Co-
herent plane-wave compounding for very high frame rate ultrasonog-
raphy and transient elastography,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr.,
Freq. Control, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 489–506, 2009.
[38] J. Bercoff, G. Montaldo, T. Loupas, D. Savery, F. Meziere, and M.
Fink, “Ultrafast compounding Doppler imaging: providing full blood
ﬂow characterization,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelectr., Freq.
Control, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 134–147, 2011.
[39] A. Bhuyan, J. W. Choe, B. C. Lee, I. O. Wygant, A. Nikoozadeh, Ö.
Oralkan, and B. T. Khuri-Yakub, “Integrated circuits for volumetric ul-
trasound imaging with 2-D CMUT arrays,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Cir-
cuits Syst., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 796–804, Dec. 2013.
[40] B. H. Kim, T. K. Song, Y. Yoo, J. H. Chang, S. Lee, Y. Kim, K. Cho,
and J. Song, “Hybrid volume beamforming for 3-D ultrasound imaging
using 2-D CMUT arrays,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp., 2012, pp.
2246–2249.
This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS
[41] K. Chen, B. C. Lee, K. Thomenius, B. T. Khuri-Yakub, H. S. Lee,
and C. G. Sodini, “A column-row-parallel ultrasound imaging architec-
ture for 3D plane-wave imaging and Tx 2nd-order harmonic distortion
(HD2) reduction,” in Proc. IEEE Ultrason. Symp., 2014, pp. 317–320.
Jeeun Kang received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in electronic engineering from Sogang University,
Seoul, Korea, in 2009 and 2011, respectively.
Currently, he is working toward the Ph.D. degree
in electronic engineering at Sogang University. His
main research interests include medical ultrasound
imaging and therapy, portable ultrasound imaging
system, digital signal and image processing, digital
system design, and photoacoustic imaging. He is
being supported by the Global Ph.D. Fellowship
Program through the National Research Founda-
tion of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, South Korea
(2012H1A2A1049076).
Changhan Yoon received the M.S. and Ph.D. de-
grees in electronic engineering from Sogang Univer-
sity, Seoul, Korea, in 2009 and 2013, respectively.
Currently, he is a Postdoctoral Research Associate
in the NIH Resource Center for Medical Ultra-
sonic Transducer Technology at the University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. His
main research interests include medical ultrasound
and photoacoustic imaging systems, clinical appli-
cations, and ultrasound microbeams.
Jaejin Lee received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
electronic engineering from Sogang University,
Seoul, Korea, in 2008 and 2010, respectively.
Currently, he is working toward the Ph.D. degree
in electronic engineering at Sogang University. His
main research interests include medical ultrasound
imaging, implementation of portable ultrasound
imaging systems, and digital signal processing.
Sang-Bum Kye was born in Seoul, Korea, in 1966.
He received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering
from Korea University, Seongbuk-gu, South Korea,
and the M.S. degree in electrical and electronic
engineering from the Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South
Korea, in 1989 and 1992, respectively.
He did research and development in ultrasound
scanners at Medison Company Ltd. from 1992 to
2007, at Bionet Company Ltd. from 2007 to 2014,
and at Hansono Company Ltd. in 2015. Since 2007,
he has been a Ph.D student in electronic engineering at Sogang University,
Seoul, Korea. His research interests include signal processing and low cost
system design of ultrasound systems for Point of Care (POC).
Youngbae Lee was born in Seoul, Korea, in 1965.
He received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering
from Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea, and the M.S.
degree in electrical and electronic engineering from
the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Tech-
nology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea, in 1990 and
1992, respectively.
He did research and development in medical ultra-
sound scanners at Medison Company Ltd. from 1992
to 2002, at Siemens Ultrasound Group Korea from
2003 to 2007, at Bionet Company Ltd. from 2007 to
2014, and at Hansono Company Ltd. in 2015. Since 2007, he has been a Ph.D
student in electronic engineering at Sogang University, Seoul, Korea. His re-
search interests include signal processing and ultrasound scanners for Point of
Care (POC).
Jin Ho Chang (S’00–M’08–SM’15) received the
B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronic engineering
from Sogang University, Seoul, Korea, in 2000 and
2002, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in biomed-
ical engineering from the University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 2007.
Currently, he is an Associate Professor in the
Sogang Institute of Advanced Technology, the In-
terdisciplinary Program of Integrated Biotechnology
and Electronic Engineering, Sogang University. His
research interests include photoacoustic imaging
and its clinical applications, high-frequency ultrasound imaging systems,
therapeutic ultrasound, and biomedical signal processing.
Gi-Duck Kim received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. de-
grees in electronic engineering from Sogang Univer-
sity, Seoul, Korea, in 1998, 2000, and 2008, respec-
tively.
From 1999 to 2003, he did research and devel-
opment in ultrasound signal processing at Samsung
Medison (the former Medison), Seoul, Korea.
From 2008 to 2010, he was a System Engineer for
point-of-care ultrasound systems at Bionet, Seoul,
Korea. Currently, he is a Research Professor in the
Sogang Institute of Advanced Technology, Sogang
University. His research interests include ultrasound signal processing and low
cost system design for point-of-care ultrasound systems.
Yangmo Yoo (M’09) received the B.S. and M.S. de-
grees in electronics engineering from Sogang Uni-
versity, Seoul, Korea, in 1999 and 2001, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree in bioengineering from the Uni-
versity of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA, in 2007.
From 2007 to 2009, he was a Systems Design En-
gineer with Philips Healthcare, Bothell, WA, USA.
Currently, he is an Associate Professor of Electronics
Engineering and Interdisciplinary Program of Inte-
grated Biotechnology at Sogang University. His re-
search interests include medical ultrasound imaging
and its clinical applications in diagnostics and therapy.
Tai-kyong Song (M’97) received the B.S. degree
in electronic engineering from Sogang University,
Seoul, Korea, in 1984, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical and electronic engineering
from the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology (KAIST), Seoul, Korea, in 1985 and
1990, respectively.
He was a Research Fellow in the Department of
Physiology and Biophysics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN, USA, for two years before being appointed as
an Adjunct Professor in the Department of Informa-
tion and Communication Engineering at KAIST from 1993 to 1995. He was a
Staff Scientist at Siemens Medical System Inc., Issaquah, WA, USA, from 1995
to 1997 and joined the Department of Electronic Engineering at Sogang Univer-
sity as an Assistant Professor in 1997. He was promoted to Professor in 2006.
His research interests include medical ultrasound imaging and therapy, portable
ultrasound imaging systems, ultrafast 3-D scanning algorithms, photoacoustic
imaging and its translational researches, digital signal and image processing,
and multi-modal imaging systems for preventive and surgical applications. He
has been the Director of the Medical Solution Institute at Sogang University
since 2000. Currently, he is the Dean of the College of Integrated Knowledge
and the Vice Director of the Sogang Institute of Advanced Technology at So-
gang University.
Dr. Song was an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ULTRASONICS,
FERROELECTRICS, AND FREQUENCY CONTROL from 2002 to 2007. He is a Pres-
ident of the Korean Medical Ultrasound Link and a member of the National
Academy of Engineering of Korea.
