English
Transforming Health Systems:
Gamechanging Business Models
This Entry has been submitted.
Sanjoe Jose
Founder
Year Founded:
Organization type:
Budget:
2011
for proÒt
$50,000 - $100,000
Website: http://www.emprenure.com
• Health care • Infant health • Maternal health
M-Ultra: Low Cost Cloud Based Ultra
Sound Scan
Bangalore, India Bangalore, India
* Overall
Innovation
Impact
Sustainability
*
Give Feedback
Your insights will be sent
privately to this project
to help them improve.
Rate This Project
Write a Private
Feedback
Quick Tips:
CHALLENGES PROJECTS LEARNING BLOG LOG IN
Print
Tumblr
Email
Facebook
LinkedIn
More... (292)
Settings...
AddThis Privacy
M-Ultra: Low Cost Cloud Based Ultra Sound Scan | Changemakers https://www.changemakers.com/healthbiz/entries/m-ultra-low-cost-clo...
1 sur 11 01/06/2015 16:56
Concise Summary: Help us pitch this solution! Provide an
explanation within 3-4 short sentences.
Emprenure Labs is a dynamic Indian technology Òrm providing emerging
economies a×ordable access to technologies and products that make lives
simpler and eÕ cient. Founded by group of dedicated technology
enthusiasts from IIT-Bombay. It has several interesting technologies and
tools in its portfolio and has been part of Government and Non-government
initiatives since inception.
Problem: What problem is this project trying to address?
At the present time ultrasound is not available in peripheral health centers
and FRUs in India. It is estimated that 70 % of people needing ultrasound
have no access to it and the percentage is much more in the rural areas.
Mobile technology including smart phones and networks are available in
most parts of our country and we propose to harness the mobile
technology to make a smart phone based ultrasound device. Conventionally
ultrasound systems are housed in major medical centers and are expensive
requiring experts on site. M-Ultra will be built as a tool for the last mile
diagnostics i.e in PHCs and rural areas where having a full Óedged Ultra
Sound Machine is not impossible due to cost and infrastructure constraints.
Solution: What is the proposed solution? Please be speciÒc!
Conventionally ultrasound systems are housed in major medical centers
and are expensive requiring experts on site. We propose to take away the
requirement of heavy duty processors with the use of cloud computing. The
system can be used by doctors trained to use the system. The images will
be processed by the cloud server providing analytical reports in
emergencies. A web-interface application will be made in the cloud so that
experts can access the stored data for formal reporting. The FRUs will be
PROJECT SUMMARY
ELEVATOR PITCH
ABOUT PROJECT
Clarity of Model
Financial Sustainability
Idea Originality
Impact Measurement
Impact Potential
Partnerships
Scalability
Team
Understanding of
Marketplace
Strength
Need
Improvement
M-Ultra: Low Cost Cloud Based Ultra Sound Scan | Changemakers https://www.changemakers.com/healthbiz/entries/m-ultra-low-cost-clo...
2 sur 11 01/06/2015 16:56
Example: Walk us through a speciÒc example(s) of how this
solution makes a di×erence; include its primary activities.
70 % of people needing ultrasound have no access to it. M-Ultra will be built as a
tool for the last mile diagnostics i.e in PHCs and rural areas where having a full
Óedged Ultra Sound Machine is not impossible due to cost and infrastructure
constraints. The functionality will be lesser compared to standard tools in order
to make it a×ordable for the target audience. The First Referral Units will be able
to detect common medical, surgical and obstetric emergencies such as
appendicitis, gall stones, kidney stones, and obstructed labor to name a few and
take neccessary action. Using the power of general purpose probes,
smartphones and cloud computing m-ultra will be able to provide the
functionalities at 1/10th the cost of currently available products.
Impact: What is the impact of the work to date? Also describe
the projected future impact.
We are the design stage and hence not applicable. However once implemented
the major beneÒciary will be women and children since our product would be
able to diagnose complications in pregnancy and thereby reduce Maternal
Mortality Rate (MMR) and by early diagnosis reduce Infant mortality rate. In
general People from lower income strata and bottom of the pyramid will also be
beneÒted by early diagnosis of various ailments. People from Rural areas with
limited access to healthcare facilities.
IMPACT: HOW DOES IT WORK
M-Ultra: Low Cost Cloud Based Ultra Sound Scan | Changemakers https://www.changemakers.com/healthbiz/entries/m-ultra-low-cost-clo...
3 sur 11 01/06/2015 16:56
Financial Sustainability Plan: What is this solution's plan to
ensure this initiative's Ònancial sustainability?
Short term objectives of the project (upto three years) is to provide smart phone
based ultra sound probes to more than 23900 Primary Health Centres and more
than 4800 Community Health Centres (CHCs) in India through NRHM. In long
term we want to provide smart phone based ultra sound probes to all types of
Peripheral Health Clinics across the globe helping people needing ultrasound
assistance to have access to it.
Marketplace: Who else is addressing the problem outlined
here? How does the proposed project di×er from these
approaches?
All the currently available portable products are priced heavily making them
unÒt for use in PHCs and rural clinics. For example GE's VScan was launched
with a price tag of $8000, high end features and with a launch function where all
the major hospitals were targeted. There claim of it being built for last mile
diagnostics contradicts with their actions.
Founding Story
In one of our discussions with Dr. Joseph he spoke about the potential of Ultra
Sound as point of care diagnostics tool in savings millions of lives. He
mentioned how the cost is an impediment. On further research we realized that
cost of Ultra Sound Scan systems can be drastically brought down using the
latest technologies and it can be made portable with remote connectivity too.
Organization Name
Emprenure Labs
SUSTAINABILITY
TEAM
M-Ultra: Low Cost Cloud Based Ultra Sound Scan | Changemakers https://www.changemakers.com/healthbiz/entries/m-ultra-low-cost-clo...
4 sur 11 01/06/2015 16:56
First Name
Sanjoe
Last Name
Jose
Email
sanjoe@emprenure.com
Twitter URL
Facebook URL
The information you provide here will be used to Òll in any parts of your proÒle
that have been left blank, such as interests, organization information, and
website. No contact information will be made public. Please uncheck here if you
do not want this to happen..
ABOUT YOU
ABOUT YOU
M-Ultra: Low Cost Cloud Based Ultra Sound Scan | Changemakers https://www.changemakers.com/healthbiz/entries/m-ultra-low-cost-clo...
5 sur 11 01/06/2015 16:56
Explain what the "innovation" is about, e.g., is it the idea and/or the model
you use to accomplish the idea, or your understanding of the target
population, etc.?
M-ultra is a low cost ultrasonic medical imaging device that can be used as a
point of care diagnostic tool in low resource setting through seamless blend of
technologies at a×ordable cost. The First Referral Units will be able to detect
common medical, surgical and obstetric emergencies such as appendicitis, gall
stones, kidney stones, and obstructed labor to name a few and take neccessary
action. Using the power of general purpose probes, smartphones and cloud
computing m-ultra will be able to provide the functionalities at 1/10th the cost of
currently available products.
Describe how your innovation model is distinct from any other organization
in your Òeld?
All the currently available portable ultra sound products are priced heavily
making them unÒt for use in PHCs and rural clinics. For example GE's VScan as
launched with a price tag of $8000, high end features and doesn't provide cloud
connectivity which is essential to address lack of availability of experts in patient
location. Regarding comparison of M-Ultra with standard products in the market,
M-Ultra will be built as a tool for the last mile diagnostics i.e in PHCs and rural
areas where having a full Óedged Ultra Sound Machine is not impossible due to
cost and infrastructure constraints. The functionality will be lesser compared to
standard tools in order to make it a×ordable for the target audience.
What type of operating environment and internal organizational factors
make your innovation successful?
The team consists of a Doctor working closely with WHO and Indian
Government in healthcare initiatives, IIT Bombay alumni, and engineers who
have worked with esteemed R&D companies like National Instruments and
DRDO Labs. Each of the technologies used are independently proven and
available in market. The team is putting together these technologies in a
platform which is easily accessible and a×ordable for everyone across the world.
In addition to this we have already secured support of rural outreach programs
run by organizations like NRHM (Govt of India), Biocon Foundation, Wockhardt
Foundation, Aravind Eye, Dorabji Trust etc.
How do you make sure you constantly innovate in light of (potential)
external challenges, or your growth plan?
The essence of our project lies in reaching out to the people in need of our
product for diagnosis. Execution and the operation has to be of highest level to
INNOVATION
M-Ultra: Low Cost Cloud Based Ultra Sound Scan | Changemakers https://www.changemakers.com/healthbiz/entries/m-ultra-low-cost-clo...
6 sur 11 01/06/2015 16:56
Organization Country
, KA, Bangalore
M-Ultra: Low Cost Cloud Based Ultra Sound Scan | Changemakers https://www.changemakers.com/healthbiz/entries/m-ultra-low-cost-clo...
7 sur 11 01/06/2015 16:56
The systemic challenge you are trying to overcome (select one)
Bring accessible healthcare to communities in emerging markets
Health area (target market) where the need is [select only one]
Primary healthcare services
Categories along the health continuum you are covering [select all that
apply]
Detection, Intervention, Follow-up.
Stage that best applies to your solution [select only one]
Idea (poised to launch)
Core strategies of your business model [select all that apply]
Other.
If other, specify here:
Use of latest technology
Most relevant tools you are using to implement the strategies outlined
above [select only two]
Technology.
If other, specify here:
What is your value proposition?
M-Ultra will be built as a tool for the last mile diagnostics i.e in PHCs and rural
areas where having a full Óedged Ultra Sound Machine is not impossible due to
cost and infrastructure constraints. The First Referral Units will be able to detect
common medical, surgical and obstetric emergencies such as appendicitis, gall
stones, kidney stones, and obstructed labor to name a few and take neccessary
action. Using the power of general purpose probes, smartphones and cloud
computing m-ultra will be able to provide the functionalities at 1/10th the cost of
currently available products.
Who is your customer(s)?
Targeted end users are doctors/sonographers at First Referral Units ( FRUs) of
Government health systems which cater to Base of Pyramid Population in India
and as well as in other low resource countries. The secondary targeted users are
doctors/sonographers working at smaller hospitals or clinics and in
mobile/outreach healthcare initiatives. As Ultrasound is becoming an extension
BUSINESS MODEL
M-Ultra: Low Cost Cloud Based Ultra Sound Scan | Changemakers https://www.changemakers.com/healthbiz/entries/m-ultra-low-cost-clo...
8 sur 11 01/06/2015 16:56
What methods for quantiÒcation of social impact are you applying (if at all)?
We would like to measure our impact by the number of FRUs which will
equipped with M-ultra.
Could your solution work in other geographies or regions? If so, where?
NA.
What is your projected impact over the next 1-3 years?
The propensity to use preventive health services, such as regular medical check
ups and participation in population screening programmes, is more prevalent
among higher socioeconomic groups.In addition, Ònancial and other barriers to
health services may perpetuate or further augment existing socioeconomic
disparities in health.The inability of lower socioeconomic groups to purchase
costly health services or insurance may prevent them from accessing care. This
poses an important disadvantage for these groups, given their greater burden of
disease and corresponding greater need for health services. We are trying to
bridge this widening gap by providing easy accessibility to preventive healthcare
at a×ordable costs.
Organization's Country of Operation
, KA, Bangalore
SOCIAL IMPACT
M-Ultra: Low Cost Cloud Based Ultra Sound Scan | Changemakers https://www.changemakers.com/healthbiz/entries/m-ultra-low-cost-clo...
9 sur 11 01/06/2015 16:56
Elaborate on your current Ònancing strategy
For Phase I of the project we will require $120,000 to complete the prototype. We
have secured $60,000 from Grand Challenges Canada. On successful completion
of Phase I we are eligible for second grant from GCC of $ 1 mn which will be
suÕ cient to take us to production stage. Once we reach production stage we will
be generating revenue through sale of the device. Since we propose to make
m-ultra available at an a×ordable price and as the cost of the equipment will be
very low, it can be borne by the health care systems or hospital itself.
Share of revenue generation in total income of organization (in percent)
100%
Direct sales to patients or other beneÒciaries (in percent)
30%
Of the possible sources of these sales listed below, check all that apply to
your current strategy
Patients, Caregivers, Private businesses, Other beneÒciaries.
Licensing fees, e.g., for technology/franchise model (in percent)
30%
Of the possible sources of these licensing opportunities listed below, check
all that apply to your current strategy
Foundations, Private businesses, Regional government, National government.
Service contract with organizations, e.g., government, NGOs (in percent)
40%
Of the possible sources of the service contracts listed below, check all that
apply to your current strategy
Foundations, Private businesses, Regional government, National government.
Explain your revenue generation strategy in more detail
nce we reach production stage we will be generating revenue through sale of the
device. Since we propose to make m-ultra available at an a×ordable price and as
the cost of the equipment will be very low, it can be borne by the health care
systems or hospital itself. Cost of cloud computing service which will be the
operating cost for ‘M-ultra’, can be an annual subscription fee or as pay-per-use
by the health systems. The health systems in turn charge their clients a nominal
SUSTAINABILITY
M-Ultra: Low Cost Cloud Based Ultra Sound Scan | Changemakers https://www.changemakers.com/healthbiz/entries/m-ultra-low-cost-clo...
10 sur 11 01/06/2015 16:56
Years in Operation
Operating 1-5 years
Has the organization received awards or honors? Please tell us about them
We have been selected for award in Grand Challenges Canada for the same project
with funding.
  

© 2015 Ashoka
Changemakers.
Terms & Privacy Policy
About
What You Can Do Here
Our Team
Careers
FAQs
Partners
Contact Us
M-Ultra: Low Cost Cloud Based Ultra Sound Scan | Changemakers https://www.changemakers.com/healthbiz/entries/m-ultra-low-cost-clo...
11 sur 11 01/06/2015 16:56
