7-; 4,034,747,
‘W
United States Patent n91 [111 4,034,744
Goldberg [451 July 12, 1977
[54] ULTRASONIC SCANNING SYSTEM WITH 3,779,234 12/1973 Eggleton et al. .................. 128/2 V
VIDEO RECORDER 3,817,089 6/1974 Eggleton et al. ................ 73167.8 s
3,828,609 8/1974 Furon et al. ..................... 73/67.8 S
[75] Inventor: Paul R. Goldberg, Palo Alto, Calif.
[73] Assignee: Smith Kline Instruments, Inc.,
Sunnyvale, Calif.
Primary Examiner-Kyle L. Howell
l [57] ABSTRACT
[2 1 App!‘ No" “L623 An ultrasonic scanning system for observing the inter
[22] Filed: Nov. 13, 1975 nal organs of the body including at least one ultrasonic
transducer for sequentially scanning a region of the
2
""""""""""" body and pulsing means for periodically pulsing said
""""""""""" ’128,2 (‘)5 z’ transducer as it begins a scan. Video recording means
[58] no“ 0' Search ______________ 128/2 v 2 R 2 65 Z, records a composite signal including scanning, pulse
' 713/67 8 S’ rate and echo information for reproduction. Display
' means are included for directly displaying the informa
[56] References Cited \‘ tion or for displaying the play-back from the video
U_S_ PATENT DOCUMENTS ' recorder. The display is interlaced, providing minimum
~ jitter and maximum resolution.
3,547,101 12/1970 Rosauer ........................... .. 128/2 V I ‘
3,690,311 9/1972 Schorum et a1. .................. 128/2 V ‘
3,778,756 l2/l973 Houston et al. .......... l28/2.05 Z X 12 Claims, 8 Drawing Figures
2|\ svsrzu
gas 2-,? CLOCK ' ' I
39
ULTRASOUND SPOT
nun-necvn mum-‘CE “10551.: f m
36
. 2._,S 26
13 f e -
I R Ixl
uuuwusn
23 19 as 2
/—k 7 36
' R
'3 M3 '“ sYNc. —’ SWEEP 'Y' _
‘ __eeueanoa ,cEnnnoRsLuuL-rwusrz
3
,0!
l6
l4
3
l1 l2
{l7
TRANSDUCER OPERATOR 41X
MOTOR CONTROLS
OONTROL MODE
2
13
31-2 43
1- DATA coiggnoumc 7 VIDEO
TAPE
courosrr: vmzo
' GENERATOR RECORDER
57 53
‘52
D's-“5;” DATA/SYNC
5mm, SEPARATOR 1
54
US. Patent July 12, 1977
2|
SYSTEM
CLOCK
ULTRASOUND
XTMR-RECVR INTERFACE
29S 26
‘33 -
323
MN
1
Sheet 1 of4
SPOT
WOBBLE
38f
eV
IXI
33? R MULTIPLIERZ
l__ 36
R
53
SYNC. T SWEEP '>Y'
__GENERATOR FDGENERATORS 6’> MULTIPLIER
I81‘ ‘ Z37
I7
I I f
TRANSDUCER OPERATOR 4|
MOTOR CONTROLS- 1
CONTROL MODE
3| ’
'2 =
DATA CONDITIONING 43
AND VIDEO
7 TAPE
COMPOSITE VIDEO RECORDER
GENERATOR
2 57 53
3 V
L DISPLAY g ,
, DATA OATA SYNC
SWITCH SEPARATOR
F/G / 54
US. Patent July 12, 1977 Sheet 2 of4 4,034,744
F/G-6
F/G-5
U.S. Patent July 12, 1977 Sheet 3 of4 4,034,744
US. Patent July 12, 1977 Sheet4 0f4 4,034,744
| 10
89v
88
4,034,744
1
ULTRASONIC SCANNING SYSTEM WITH VIDEO
RECORDER
BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION
This invention relates generally to ultrasonic scan
ning systems for use in observing organs in the body
and more particularly to an ultrasonic sector scanning
system.
In recent years ultrasonic scanning of regions of the
human body has found wide applications. Among the
advantages of such scanning systems is that the energy
required is low, greatly reducing the possibility of in- ,
jury to the patient; there are no side effects of radia
tion; and the body is not invaded.
The ultrasound is transmitted in a beam including
brief pulses each followed by a relatively long interval
where no transmission occurs. During this interval the
pulse energy is transmitted through the body. When
ever a pulse of energy strikes a boundary between two
substances having different acoustic impedances, a
portion of the energy is re?ected, some of it returning
as an echo to the source. The remaining portion of the
original energy is available to produce additional ech
oes from deeper interfaces. The crystal which serves as
the transducer converting electrical energy into sound
pulses receives the echoes and generates an electrical
signal. This signal is ampli?ed, displayed as a static or
dynamic pattern on a cathode ray tube. The relative
positions of the interfaces are shown on the display.
A particular type of scanner used is a sector scanner
since it has the ability to display a cross-sectional area
of the human body. A sector scanner generally com
prises an ultrasonic transducer (a piezoelectric ele
ment) which is mounted'and motor driven through a
suitable mechanical arrangement. The drive arrange
ment moves the transducer which is generally in the
form of a flat circular object back and forth in an arc
scanning motion. During this process, the transducer is
pulsed with high voltage spikes at pulsed repetition
rates in the order of 3000 Hz. These spikes cause the
piezoelectric element to mechanically ring, thereby
emitting high frequency sound waves. These ultrasonic
waves impinge upon the structure within the body and,
when difference of acoustic impedance exists, are par
tially re?ected back to the transducer element. At this
point, the transducer element acts like a receiver and
converts these mechanical vibrations to electrical en
ergy. This energy is ampli?ed and processed such that
it can be displayed on a cathode ray tube.
The mechanical driving arrangement not only drives
the probe but also provides an electrical output analo
gous to transducer position by the use of position sens
ing means such as a potentiometer which translates
position information into electrical energy. The electri
cal signal is processed and utilized to create horizontal
and vertical signals which, along with the returning
ultrasonic impulses, are used to create an X-Y display
on the cathode ray tube. The resultant image is a repre
sentation of the internal organs of the body.
In order for the information displayed on the cathode
ray tube monitor to be most effective in use, it is neces
sary to record these images so that they can later be
viewed and compared. The methods presently em
ployed take the form of a movie camera photographing
the monitor display or a television camera focused on
the monitor connected to a video tape recorder. Elec
trostatic and similar printers have also been used.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
2
Another prior art system which allows real time ex
amination of internal organs of the body such as the
heart employs a catheter which has a rotating tip which
carries a plurality of transducers. The transducers are
selectively connected to a pulser to transmit ultrasonic
pulses into the body and to receive echoes therefrom.
The echo pulses are processed and applied to a cathode
ray tube whereby they provide sequential representa
tions of the area at a rate which is dependent upon the
speed of rotation of the transducers and with a resolu
tion which is dependent upon the pulse rate. Field rates
are selected so that the display can be photographed
with a movie camera, for example, 24 frames per sec
ond. The system brie?y described above is the subject
of US. Pat. No. 3,779,234.
In all the prior methods there is no system approach.
Each device, display and recorder, operate in their
normal mode. There is no attempt to combine the char
acteristics and advantages of each to obtain a better
result and reduce the overall cost of the system.
SUMMARY AND OBJECTS OF THE INVENTION
It is a general object of the present invention to pro
vide an improved ultrasonic sector scanning system.
It is another object of the present invention to pro
vide an ultrasonic sector scanning system in which the
scanning information is displayed and directly recorded
in a video recorder.
It is another object of the present invention to pro
vide a sector scanning system in which the display is
interlaced .to providea ?icker-free high resolution dis
play.
These and other objects of the invention are achieved
by a system which includes at least one ultrasonic trans
ducer adapted to receive electrical pulses and transmit
an ultrasonic beam into the body and which receives
re?ected ultrasonic energy and generates an electrical
signal. Means are provided for moving the transducer
so that it periodically scans a predetermined sector in a
predetermined time. Pulses are applied at a predeter
mined rate whereby the time and rate determines the
number of lines scanned in each ?eld. A video record
ing means is connected to the scanning system and
serves to record a composite signal of the scan ?eld
including information respecting the beginning of each
scan line and scan field and the transducer output
whereby when the recording is reproduced, processed
and applied to display means, it provides a display
which corresponds exactly to the original display. The
system also includes means for providing a display as
the information is recorded.
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWING
FIG. 1 is a block diagram of a system in accordance
with the present invention.
FIG. 2 is a timing diagram showing the waveforms at
various portions of the system of FIG. 1.
FIG. 3 is a perspective view of a scanning head suit
able for use in the system of the present invention.
FIG. 4 is a sectional view of the scanning head partly
broken away to show the interior components.
FIGS. 5 and 6 are sectional views taken along the
lines 5-5 and 6—6 of FIG. 4 respectively.
FIG. 7 is a view of one side of the head portion partly
broken away to show the interior components.
FIG. 8 is a view of the opposite side of the head partly
broken away to show the interior components.
4,034,744
3
DESCRIPTION OF PREFERRED EMBODIMENTS
The system described includes a rotor 11 driven by a
motor 12. The rotor 11 carries a plurality of ultrasonic
transducers 13 spaced about the periphery of the rotor.
The rotating member 11 also carries a plurality of
spaced re?ecting surfaces 14 which are viewed by a
phototransducer 16 which provides an output pulse as
each re?ective surface 14 passes the phototransducer.
The output of the phototransducer 16 is applied to
motor control 17 to which is also applied a reference
frequency along the line 18 from sync generator 19
which serves to synchronize the operation of the over
all system as will be presently described. Input to the
sync generator is from a clock system 21 which may
include a crystal together with appropriate dividers to
provide a control frequency to the sync generator 19.
The output on the line 18 may, for example, be a 60
Hertz output which is applied to the motor control. The
output pulses from the phototransducer 16 are em
ployed in a servo system to servo control operation of
the motor 12 and to control the position of the rotor 11
whereby the position of the transducer is accurately
determined as the rotor rotates. Ultrasonic pulses are
applied sequentially to the individual transducers at a
high rate so that they scan a plurality of lines in a fan or
sector as the member rotates. This is schematically
shown in the Figure where the transducers 13 are
shown with one side connected to a common input line
23 with the other side adapted to be connected to
ground 24 as the rotor rotates. Consequently, only one
of the transducers is connected during 90° of rotation.
The arrangement is such that as one transducer scans a
90° sector, the next transducer begins to scan the same
90° sector in sequence.
The sync generator 19 applies trigger pulses along
the line 26 to an interface 27 which drives a suitable
transmitter and receiver 28. For example, the transmit
- ter-receiver may be an Ekoline ZOA/B which serves to
receive trigger pulses and transmit ultrasonic pulses for
application to the transducer. The transducer receives
the echoes .from the interfaces and the receiver pro
cesses the same and provides ultrasound data along the
line 29 to the interface 27. The ultrasound data appears
on the line 30 and is applied to a data conditioning and
composite video generator 31 and to a display data
switch 32. At the beginning of each trigger pulse, the
sync generator 19 applies a sync pulse to the sweep
generator 33 which serves to form a plurality of saw
tooth voltage waves such as shown in FIG. 2C. The
sawtooth voltage waves provide the so-called “R”
sweep voltage which is modi?ed as will be presently
described. In addition, the sync generator also serves to
generate a trigger pulse responsive to the output from
the transducer 16 to thereby indicate the beginning of
a sweep. This trigger pulse serves to form a sawtooth
voltage such as shown in FIG. 2B which provides the 0
sweep voltage which is also modi?ed. The R and 0
sweep voltages are then applied to X and Y multipliers
36 and 37 which provide outputs equal to X = R sine 0
and Y= R cosine 0, respectively. This causes the sweep
of the oscilloscope to be such as shown at 38 compris
ing a 90° scan with a plurality of scan lines 39 each
beginning with the application of a pulse to the trans
ducer and each ?eld or scan representing 90° rotation
of the transducer. The number of lines is, therefore,
directly dependent upon the frequency of the ultra
sonic pulses which are applied to the transducers. The
5
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
4
ultrasound data on the line 30 is applied through the
display switch to the monitor along the line 41 and
serves to modulate the intensity of the beam whereby
the scan will be modulated in accordance with the
ultrasound data which is received as a result of re?ec
tions from the interfaces. The speed of rotation of the“)
rotor 11 determines the number of ?elds or displays;I
which are available per second while the number of1\
pulses applied determines the number of lines. It is‘
apparent, however, that the pulse rate is limited by the l
depth which the scan must reach since there must be:vv
enough time between pulses to receive echoes from the
deepest portion observed.
In accordance with the present invention, the sync
signals from the sync generator 19 corresponding both
to the R and 0 sync signals applied to the sweep genera
tors are also applied to a data conditioner 31. The data
conditioner also receives the ultrasound data. The unit
processes the data in a manner similar to a television
composite signal generator. It provides a composite
video signal on the line 43. The signal is illustrated at
Figure 2A and includes vertical sync pulses 51, hori
zontal sync pulses 52 and the ultrasound data 53 for
each scan line.
The video recorder may be any conventional video
recorder such as a helical scan recorder which serves to
record video signal. The rotation of the recording
heads and the motion of the tape is synchronized with
the timing system of the ultrasonic scanning system
whereby to provide the recording of sequential ?elds 0
information. '
During playback, the video recorder composite sig
nal is applied along the line 53 to a data sync separator
54 which separates out the R and 0 sync pulses and
applies them to the sweep generator 33 which provides
the appropriate sweep signals through the multipliers
36 and 37 for driving the de?ection circuits of the
cathode ray tube. The separated ultrasound data on the
line 57 is applied to the display switch and directly to
the video display in the same manner as the original
ultrasound pulses to modulate the intensity. Thus, the
playback display is identical to the original display.
In accordance with another feature of the present
invention, the rate of rotation and the pulse rate are so
selected that the scan lines are interlaced, that is, the
scan lines for each sequential ?eld are interlaced with
the scan line of the previous ?eld thereby giving a
higher resolution without ?icker.
More speci?cally, most video tape recorders com
mercially available are based on a helical scanning
principle. The video recording tape is wrapped around
a drum in which one or more record/playback heads
are rotating. Each head protrudes through a slot which
traverses the outer diameter of the drum. The tape is
wrapped almost parallel to the plane of the moving
head so that the head moves at an angle with respect to
the longitudinal axis of the tape, thus generating a heli
cal scanning pattern. Two television ?elds are recorded
on the tape every one-thirtieth of a second. These ?elds
by themselves do not represent the entire television
picture. These two ?elds are required to create a televi
sion frame. The two ?elds are scanned onto a cathode
ray tube screen in an interlaced pattern to provide the
frame. That is, the ?rst set of horizontal scan lines
corresponding to one ?eld is drawn on the phosphor
screen, after which the second set corresponding to the
other ?eld is placed in the space between the ?rst set of
lines. This 2:l interlacing technique provides the
4,034,744
5
viewer with a high resolution, twice the resolution of
either ?eld separately.
If the sector scanning probe just described is built
with four rotating transducer elements and the rotation
is held in synchronism with the rotating heads of the
video recorder, the ultrasonic signals produced will be
recorded in the same ?eld/frame format as would a
television image. Assuming that the cylindrical trans
ducer head makes a complete rotation in one-thirtieth
of a second in 1:1 synchronism with the video tape
recorder head, four ?elds per revolution are created if
a four element head is chosen. Each ?eld would con
tain a number of lines which would be determined by
the pulse repetition rate at which the elements are
driven and the length of time each transducer is ac
tively being pulsed. In the above case, is a pulse repeti
tion rate of 3000 Hz is chosen, there would be 25 lines
per ?eld.
In a practical system, a resolution of 25 lines per ?eld
over a 90° sector would be unacceptable even if there
were 4:1 interlace. The system is, therefore, modi?ed
to increase the number of lines visualized on the dis
play. This can be done by taking advantage of a slower
rotary rate for the rotating head to provide more lines
in each 90° segment (?eld) and interlacing a number of
successive ?elds to form a ?icker-free frame.
A suitable system would be for a transducer element
rotating at 900 rpm pulsed at 3000 Hz and utilizing a
4:1 interlace. This would give 50 lines per ?eld and 200
lines per frame. The display would be a 90° segment
with an apparent 200 line resolution. Preferably, the
interlace would be lines 1, 3, 2, 4. This would provide
minimum ?icker since the maximum time difference
between any two adjacent lines would be only two
?elds.
For the interlace system to work with no inconsisten
cies in the ?nal display, the number of lines per ?eld
and the interlace ratio must be precisely controlled
from frame to frame. Therefore, the pulse repetition
rate of the ultrasonoscope driving the rotating section
transducer is synchronized with the rotating transducer
head which is achieved by the sync generator in the
present invention.
As earlier discussed, the mechanical driving arrange
ment of the prior art sector scanner provides an electri
cal output analogous to transducer position by use of a
position sensing means. This electrical output is ulti
mately used to create the X-Y display on the cathode
ray tube. The rotating sector transducer also provides a
position signal. This signal is recorded on the video
tape recorder in the present method and provides the
?eld synchronizing pulse.
In order to play back the recorded sector scanning
image, the position of the transducer element in each
instant of time must be available to the X-Y display
processing circuitry simultaneously with the appropri
ate ultrasonic information. This is provided by the line
pulses recorded for each scan line. Upon reproduction
from the video tape recorder, the timing information is
recovered to drive the sweep generators. In order to
provide an appropriate interlace, the number of lines
per ?eld are chosen to include a fractional portion, that
is, if there is to be a 4:1 interlace, the lines per ?eld
would be 49.25 to provide the suitable interlace.
A suitable rotating head assembly and probe for use
in connection with the present invention is shown in
FIGS. 3 through 8. The rotating head assembly and
probe form the subject matter of copending application
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
6
Ser. No. 631,456 ?led Nov. 13, 1975. The probe in
cludes handle 61 which is detachably secured to a scan
ning head 62 by means of a ring 63 which engages
threads 64 formed on the head 62 (FIG. 4). The attach
ment of the head 62 to the handle 61 provides a me
chanical connection to the driving motor and an elec
trical connection to associated equipment as will be
presently described.
The head 62 includes the rotor 11 with a plurality of
transducers 13 which rotate in a plane parallel to the
axis of the probe handle. Referring more particularly to
FIG. 4, the handle 61 serves to house the motor 12 with
the motor shaft 64 attached to coupler 66. The coupler
has its forward end slotted with two crossing slots 67 as
shown more particularly in FIG. 6. The slots 67 are
adapted to engage pin 68 mounted on driven shaft 69.
The driven shaft 69 is mounted for rotation by spaced
bearings 71 and 72 mounted in the disc shaped mount
ing block 73. An O-ring seal 74 serves to seal the shaft
and prevent leakage of ultrasound transmitting ?uid
which ?lls the head portion as will be presently de
scribed. Opinion gear 76 is mounted on the end of the
shaft and engages bevel gear 77 mounted on the rotor
shaft 78. Thus, rotation of the motor serves to rotate
the rotor 11. The rotor 11 is supported for rotation by
a shaft 78 which is mounted on spaced bearings 79 and
81. The complete assembly just described is housed
within a shell or cover 82 which has a relatively thin
portion 83 adjacent the probe face to thereby permit
the transmission of ultrasonic energy. The complete
interior of the housing is ?lled with a suitable ?uid
which provides continuity for the transmission of the
ultrasonic energy from the transducers 13 to and
through the window 83. The window 83 is adapted to
be placed against the body to be examined. An inter
face is applied to the body for transmission of the ultra
sound into the body with minimum losses at the inter
faces. As previously described, the rotor includes a
plurality of re?ective surfaces 14. The phototransducer
16 cooperates with the surfaces and provides an output
signal through a connector 84 to the cable 85 carried
by the handle. The ultrasound pulses are applied to the
wires 23 through a coaxial connector 86 to the brush
block 87 suitably attached to the mounting brackets 88
by screws 89. The brushes 91, 92 and 93 ride within
associated grooves formed on the extension of the shaft
78. Slip rings are carried in the grooves and are con
nected to leads which run coaxially within the hollow
shaft 78 and exit at the opposite end of the rotor as will
be presently described. The brush block and its mount
ing is more clearly shown in FIG. 7 and includes a pair
of screws 89 attaching the brush block 87 to L-shaped
support 88 which, in turn, are secured to the disc 73.
Referring to FIG. 8, the commutating system at the
end of the rotor is more clearly shown. The system
includes a printed circuit board 101 suitably attached
to the rotor as, for example, by pins 102, FIG. 4. The
commutating system includes four commutating seg
ments 103, each having one end 104 connected to an
associated transducer and extending approximately
90°. The ultrasonic energy is directed coaxially through
the shaft and connected to the continuous commutat
ing ring 106. A brush 107 serves to provide contact
between the rings 106 and segments 103 whereby as
the rotor is rotated, the ring 106 is sequentially con
nected to each of the segments 103 to sequentially
connect one side of each of the transducers to the
source of energy. The other side of each of the trans
4,034,744
7
ducers is connected to a ring 105 which is, in turn,
connected to ground to provide the other terminal for
the transducers. The rotor housing 82 includes a ?rst
portion 108 which is threaded and adapted to be en
gaged by the ring 63 and a second substantially hemi
spherical portion 109 adapted to be attached thereto so
that the rotor and associated parts can be placed within
a ?uid-tight housing. The hemispherical portion 109 is
suitably secured to the portion 108 by means of screws
110 of FIG. 7. A suitable sealant is provided between
the spherical portions and the intersecting surfaces of
the portion 108. Thus, it is seen that there is provided
a compact, movable probe which can be easily applied
to the body for scanning particular section thereof. in
the event that different transducer characteristics are
required, the head portions can be removed and a new
head inserted. For example, a head having three or two
transducers may be employed in connection with the
motor handle 61.
Although the system described above operates by
synchronously recording on the recording medium the
?elds and lines scanned by the transducer with the
motion of the recording head, it is possible to operate
asynchronously. That is, the movement of the ultra
sonic transducer need not by synchronous with the
movement of the recording heads.
Thus, there has been described an ultrasonic scan
ning system which efficiently integrates a video re
corder with an ultrasonic scanner to provide a high
resolution ?icker-free display of the information re
garding interfaces in the body being scanned.
What is claimed is:
1. An ultrasonic scanning system including at least
one ultrasonic transducer adapted to receive electrical
pulses and transmit an ultrasonic beam and to receive
ultrasonic energy and generate an electrical signal,
means for causing said beam to periodically scan a
. predetermined sector in a predetermined time, means
providing a signal at the beginning of each scan sector,
means for applying pulses to the transducer at a prede
termined rate to form a plurality of ultrasonic pulses
which travel in scan lines, the period of said scan and
rate of said pulses determining the number of scan lines
scanned in each sector, a video recording means con
nected to said scanning system and serving to record a
composite signal including said beginning ofscan signal
for each scan sector, the application of said pulses to
form scan lines and the transducer output whereby
when the recording is reproduced, processed and ap
plied to control display means it forms a display of the
scanned lines in said sector.
2. An ultrasonic scanning system as in claim 1 includ
ing means for processing the signal respecting the be
ginning of said scan sector, the application of said
pulses and the transducer output and for directly apply
ing the processed information to a display means dur
ing recording whereby said display means forms a dis
play of the information which is being recorded.
3. An ultrasonic scanning system as in claim 1
wherein said ultrasonic transducer includes a plurality
of transducers adapted to sequentially scan the sector
with the scan line of each transducer beginning at a
different angle whereby when the signal is reproduced
and sequential sectors are applied to the display means
the scan lines are interlaced.
4. An ultrasonic scanning system as in claim 4 includ
ing four ultrasonic transducers disposed at 90° with
10
25
30
35
45
55
65
8
respect to one another whereby each transducer scans
one sector and ?rst scan line in four and wherein the
beginning of the sectors is controlled so that the scan
lines of the transducers are interlaced l, 3, 2, 4
whereby the time difference between adjacent scan
lines is minimized for a four sector interlace.
5. An ultrasonic scanning system as in claim 1
wherein said transducers are angularly disposed on a
rotating member whereby as the member is rotated
they sequentially scan and predetermined scan sector
in a predetermined time and wherein said means for
generating a signal corresponding to the beginning of
each scan sector includes means for generating the
signal responsive to the rotation of the rotating mem
ber.
6. An ultrasonic scanning system as in claim 2
wherein said display means comprises a cathode ray
tube in which an electron beam impinges upon a dis
play screen and which includes horizontal and vertical
de?ection means for controlling position of the beam
and means for controlling the intensity of the beam,
said processed signal serving to cause the beam to scan
a sector with a plurality of display lines corresponding
to_ the scan lines and to control the intensity in accor
dance with the intensity of the recorded signal.
7. An ultrasonic scanning system as in claim 3
wherein said display means comprises a cathode ray
tube in which an electron beam impinges upon a dis
play screen and which includes horizontal and vertical
de?ection means and for controlling the position of the
beam and means for controlling the intensity of the
beam, said processed signal serving to cause the beam
to scan a sector with a plurality of display lines corre
sponding to the scan lines and to control the intensity in
accordance with the intensity of the recorded signal.
8. An ultrasonic scanning system as in claim 4
wherein said display means comprises a cathode ray
tube in which an electron beam impinges upon a dis
play screen and which includes horizontal and vertical
de?ection means for controlling the position of the
beam and means for controlling the intensity of the
beam, said processed signal serving to cause the beam
to scan a sector with a plurality of display lines corre
sponding to the scan lines and to control the intensity in
accordance with the intensity of the recorded signal.
9. An ultrasonic scanning system including at least
one ultrasonic transducer adapted to receive electrical
pulses and transmit an ultrasonic beam and to receive
ultrasonic energy re?ected from interfaces and gener
ate an electrical signal corresponding thereto, means
for moving said transducer so that its beam periodically
scans a predetermined sector in a predetermined time,
means for applying pulses to the transducer at a prede
termined rate to form a plurality of ultrasonic pulses
which travel in scan lines in said sector, the predeter
mined time and predetermined rate determining the
number of scan lines in each sector, a display means of
the type in which the display is formed by traces, means
for initiating said traces synchronously with the ultra
sonic beam scan sector and scan lines so that it forms a
sector with a corresponding number of lines, means
responsive to said transducer output for modulating the
intensity of said trace whereby the intensity of the dis
play represents ultrasonic interfaces in said scanned
sector, a video recording means connected to said
scanning system and serving to snychronously record a
composite signal including information respecting the
beginning of each scan sector, scan line and the trans
4,034,744
ducer output whereby when the recording is later re
produced, processed and applied to said display means
it forms a display corresponding to the initial display.
10. An ultrasonic scanning system including at least
one ultrasonic transducer adapted to receive electrical
pulses and transmit an ultrasonic beam and to receive
ultrasonic energy and generate an electrical signal,
means for moving said transducer so that the beam
periodically scans a predetermined sector in a prede
termined time, means for applying pulses to the trans
ducer at a predetermined rate to form a plurality of
ultrasonic pulses which travel in scan lines, the prede
termined time and the pulse rate determining the num
ber of scan lines scanned in each sector, a video record
ing means connected to said scanning system and serv
ing to synchronously record a signal including informa~
tion respecting the scan lines, the position of the trans
ducer and the transducer output whereby when the
recording is reproduced, processed and applied to con
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
10
trol a display means the display means forms a display
of the scanned sector.
11. An ultrasonic scanning system as in claim 10
including means for processing the information re
specting the position of the transducer and scan line
and the transducer output and for directly applying the
processed information to a display means during re
cording whereby said display means forms a display of
the information which is being recorded.
12. An ultrasonic scanning system as in claim 10
wherein said display means comprises a cathode ray
tube in which an electron beam impinges upon a dis
play screen and which includes horizontal and vertical
de?ection means for controlling position of the beam
and means for controlling the intensity of the beam,
said means for receiving the processed reproduced
signal and serving to cause the beam to scan a sector
with a plurality of display lines corresponding to the
scan lines and to control the intensity in accordance
with the intensity of the recorded signal.
* Ill * * *
