1/29/5313
1111 4,185,501
Jan. 29, 1980
United States Patent [191
Proudian et al. [45]
[54] ULTRASONIC SECTOR SCANNER [56] References Cited
U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS
[75] Invent0r$= Andrew P-Proudiamchatsworth; 3,107,521 10/1963 McClure 73/640
Arthur E. Nagy, Santa Monica, both 3,121,324 2/1964 Cowan 73/618
of Calif. Primary Examiner—Jerry W. Myracle
[57] ABSTRACT
[73] Assignee: Second Foundation, Woodland Hills,
Calif. An ultrasonic sector scanner for producing a sector
scan in an object to be examined in which one or more
ultrasonic transducers are positioned to direct ultra
sonic waves toward the surface of one or more movable
re?ectors. The movable re?ectors traverse an arcuate
path with respect to a stationary re?ector which is
[21] Appl. No.: 876,989
[22] Filed: Feb. 13, 1978 positioned to receive the ultrasonic waves scanning the
surface of the stationary re?ector from each of the
movable re?ectors and converge such waves at a point
in front of the stationary re?ector.
17 Claims, 6 Drawing Figures
0
mwm
9/6
2n7
Nim
11...,
mm4
3
/6
n3,
3
“6
u/
“3
m7
[51] Int. Cl.2
[52] US. Cl. ..
[58] Field of Search
73/618, 619, 621, 623; 128/2 V, 2.05 Z
US. Patent Jan. 29, 1980 Sheet 1 Of3 4,185,501
Sheet 2 of 3
U.S. Patent Jan. 29, 1980
. .5
U.S. Patent Jan. 29, 1980 Sheet 3 Of3 4,185,501
4,185,501
1
ULTRASONIC SECTOR SCANNER
BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION
1. Field of the Invention
The invention relates to the ?eld of ultrasonic scan
ners, and in particular to ultrasonic mechanical scanners
for producing sector scans in an object to be scanned.
2. Prior art
Cross-Sectional Echography (CSE) is a commonly
used technique for producing two dimensional images
of cross-sectional slices of the human anatomy. So
called real time or dynamic CSE is a technique whereby
such images are produced sequentially at a frame rate
10
sufficiently high to enable dynamic visualization of 15
moving organs.
In CSE, the cross-sectional image is built up from a
series of successive scan lines, each line being generated
by the transmission of a short pulse of ultrasonic radia
tion into the object by an ultrasonic transducer, and
subsequent detection and recording of the echoes re-,
flected back to the transducer by the tissue structures
within the object. The transmitted pulse is angularly
con?ned by the use of a transducer aperture large com
pared to the wavelength of the ultrasound radiation to a
rather narrow beam or pencil of radiation. The record
ing and display of the re?ected echoes is analogous to
that used in radar or sonar displays. In a linear scanner,
the successive lines of a cross-sectional image are paral
lel to and placed one line spacing apart from one an
other. In a sector scanner, the successive lines are dis
placed angularly from one another and intersect at some
common origin, which is the center of the scan. Dis
placement of the beams, and therefore scanning, is
achieved either electronically, as is the case for phased
array scanners, or by means of mechanical motions, as is
the case for mechanical scanners.
While numerous sector scanners, both mechanical
and electronic, are presently being marketed, these
sector scanners all suffer from severe limitations. One of
the existing scanners is the direct contact oscillating
transducer mechanical scanner. In this scanner, exem
pli?ed by the devices described by J. Griffith et al, in
“A Sector Scanner for Real Time Two Dimensional
Echo Cardiography”, Circulation, Volume XLIX, June
1974, and by Eggleton et al, in “Visualization of Car
diac Dynamics with Real Time Ultrasonic Scanner”,
Ultrasound in Medicine, D. White, ed., Plenum Press
1:385, 1975, a single transducer is oscillated about an
axis nominally lying in the front plane and passing
through the center of the transducer with a appropriate
angle sensor being used to monitor the angular position
of the transducer at any time. Contact with the patient
is maintained by the use of a gel, and in operation the
patient’s tissues must conform to the movement of the
transducer which is essentially rigid. Such a contact can
result in poor acoustic coupling to the skin as well as an
unpleasant vibrating sensation to the patient and result
ing diagnostic dif?culties. In addition, the direct contact
mechanical sector scanners are limited in their useful
scanning angle by the problems of the moving contact
and physical angulation of the transducer away from
the skin, in most cases to values of 30 to 45 degrees. A
further limitation common to all oscillating mechanical
sector scanners is that their angular rate of sweep is not
uniform, since the transducer or mirror system must
reverse direction at the end of each sweep in each direc
tion. As a result the line density is greatest at the edges
20
30
45
50
55
65
2
of the sector, where it is usually least desirable, and is
lowest at the center of the sector, i.e., the center of the
region of interest. Concomitant with this limitation is
the fact that the alternate direction of sweep means that
an area at the end of a sweep is interrogated twice in a
very short interval, as the scan crosses it in opposite
directions, and is not interrogated again until nearly the
duration of two frames. In addition, only the mid-point
of the scan is interrogated at a constant frame rate.
Finally, the direct contact mechanical (and phased ar
ray) scanners cannot properly visualize the tissues near
the patient’s skin because of the large acoustic pressure
?eld non-uniformities occuring in the Fresnel zone ex
tending a distance D=(d2/47t) (where d is the trans
ducer diameter and 7t is the mean acoustic wavelength)
in front of the transducer. Typically, such a region
extends three to four centimeters and thus can include
portions of the body which are of diagnostic interest.
Another type of existing scanner is the oscillating
transducer water bath scanner. In this scanner, exempli
?ed by the device described by Nakashika et al, in “Real
Time Cardiactomograph with Handy Water Immersed
Sector Scan System”, Proceedings lst Meeting of
World Federation of Ultrasound in Medicine and Biol
ogy, San Francisco, Calif, August, 1976, the oscillating
transducer is set inside a liquid ?lled head having a thin
membrane or window which is substantially acousti
cally transparent and which is in contact with the pa
tient. This provides a stationary contact with the pa
tient, with the acoustical coupling to the patient being
provided by the water or other suitable liquid (e.g.
silicone oil) and by the window. While the moving
contact problem described above is alleviated, the other
stated drawbacks of oscillating transducer scanners
remain. Furthermore, the center of the sector scan in
such devices is located within the scanner head, behind
the scanner/patient skin interface, which frequently
leads to artifacts in the recorded images due to the
interfering effects of anatomical structures, such as ribs,
when examinations are attempted through the relatively
small intercostal spaces, generally referred to as the rib
interference problem. The mechanical oscillation of the
transducer in the surrounding liquid also generates
acoustical noise and reduces the sensitivity of such scan
ners.
A further type of existing scanner is the water bath
mechanical scanner with oscillating mirror, exempli?ed
by the 150 8-4 Real Time Ultrasound Scanner, sold by
the Xerox Corporation. In this scanner, an oscillating
?at mirror is positioned in front of a stationary trans
ducer and reflects ultrasonic pulses from the latter, the
sector angle thus scanned being twice the angular ex
cursion of the mirror. The scanner head makes a station
ary contact with the patient, the transducer and mirror
are immersed in a suitable liquid, and an acoustically
transparent window is used, thus permitting the propa
gation of the acoustic pulses within the instrument and
acoustic coupling to the patient. While this device has
certain advantages over the previously described water
bath scanner, the basic limitations of this device are the
same as those of such water bath scanners with the
further disadvantage that the sector scan center is
placed still further behind the skin/window interface
because of the size of the mirror required to intercept
the transducer beam over the whole range of scan an
gles.
4,185,501
3
Another class of existing scanners is the rotating mul
tiple transducer water bath scanner. This scanner is
exempli?ed in the device described by Barber et al, in
“Duplex Scanner II: For Simultaneous Imaging of Ar
tery Tissues and Flow,” IEEE 1974 Ultrasonics Sympo
siumProceedings”, and in a device marketed under the
name Eko-Sector I (TM) and offered commercially by
the Smith-Kline Corporation. In these devices, four
transducers are mounted on the rim of a rotating wheel
or cylinder, and the wheel is immersed in a suitable
liquid ?lling the scanning head, with a suitable coupling
window providing the stationary contact interface to
the patient. The Smith-Kline device has a cylindrical
exit window placed very close to the rim of the rotating
cylinder while the Barber device has a ?at window
several centimeters away from the transducers. The
transducers are electrically connected to the acoustic
pulsing and receiving electronics by means of a suitable
commuting contact arrangement and are switched in
succession as the wheel rotates, so that only the trans
ducer sweeping the desired sector (i.e., facing the win
dow is active. While the rotating head con?guration
provides the desired regular angular line spacing and a
non-reciprocating scan and avoids vibration and the
generation of noise in the scanner head since the mov
ing element is undergoing a continuous rotational mo
tion, it suffers from the typical limitations relating to
transmitting and receiving electrical signals to and from
moving transducers and in particular, is sensitive to
electrical contact noise which is generally quite signifi
cant at the very low signal levels corresponding to pulse
echo returns. In addition, since four or more transduc
ers are used in sequence, these must be carefully
matched and positioned in order to avoid artifactual
changes in the successive images generated by the trans
ducers. Furthermore, these rotating transducer scan
- ners retain the limitation of the oscillating single trans
ducer water bath scanners that the sector scan center is
located at the center of the rotating wheel and thus well
behind the scanner patient interface, and therefore are
subject to the rib interference problems that arise from
such scanning geometry.
Existing phased array scanners are exempli?ed in
articles by M. G. Maginness et a], “State-of-the-art in
Two-Dimensional Ultrasonic Transducer Array Tech
nology”, Medical Physics, Vol. 3, No. 5, Sept/Oct.
1976, Von Ramm et al, “Cardio-Vascular Diagnosis in
the Real Time Ultrasound Imaging”, Acoustical Holog
raphy, Vol. 6, 1975, and J. Kisslo et al, “Dynamic Car
diac Imaging Using a Phased-Array Transducer Sys
tem”, published by Duke University, Durham, N.C. In
such scanners a large (16-60 element) linear array of
small transducers is used, with a variable time (phase)
delay inserted between elements of the array both in the
transmission and reception of the ultrasound signal,
resulting in a transmitted beam and a receiving beam or
sensitivity pattern whose direction is determined by the
magnitude of the inter-element time delay. In sector
scanning using phased array scanners, such scanning is
achieved without any mechanical motion of the trans
ducer array which remains in stationary contact with
the patient’s skin. Such phased array scanners have,
however, several practical limitations. One such limita
tion resides in the relative complexity of the multi-ele
ment transducer array and especially of the trasmit/
receive electronics necessary to achieve electronic
beam steering, resulting in a relatively high cost of
phased array scanners. In addition, the ultrasonic beam
.... O
5
40
65
4
quality in phased array scanners, in terms of lateral
resolution and side lobe levels and the possible occu
rance of grating lobes, is poor compared to that of sin
gle transducer scanners, particularly for beam direction
angles greater than 30 degrees away from the normal to
the transducer.
In addition to the various limitations of the scanners
described above, all existing sector and linear scanners,
both mechanical as well as phased array, are limited to
operating at a single frequency so that a different scan
ning head must be installed for each frequency and can
generate the sector scan with only one beam at a time.
Moreover, the image producing capabilities of many
existing scanners are restricted by the existence of
“echo” artifacts which degrade the quality of and com
plicate the interpretation of the re?ected signals from
the object being visualized, such echo artifacts being
caused by ultrasound energy being received by a detec
tor which energy is not directly re?ected from the body
or target under examination.
. Accordingly, it is a general object of the present
invention to provide an improved ultrasonic sector
scanner.
It is another object of the present invention to pro
vide a sector scanner which has a sector scan center of
focus which can be located at the scanner/skin interface
or beyond to minimize interference problems.
It is a further oject ofthe present invention to provide
a sector scanner which has stationary transducers and
requires no sliding or intermittent electrical contacts
between the transducers and the transmit/receive elec
tronics.
It is another object of the present invention to pro
vide a sector scanner which has a stationary contact
with the object being scanned and is free of vibration
problems.
It is still another object of the present invention to
provide a sector scanner which has a uniform line den
sity and sampling rate at all angles, and high quality
radiating and receiving beam patterns.
It is another object of the present invention to pro
vide a sector scanner which is free of echo artifacts.
It is a further object of the present invention to pro
vide a sector scanner in which no part of the body of
diagnostic interest lies in the Fresnel zone oflarge varia
tions of acoustic intensity.
It is still a further object of the present invention to
provide a sector scanner with increased line density
and/or frame rate.
It is another object of the present invention to pro
vide a sector scanner which utilizes only a single scan
ner head yet which can operate at two or more frequen
cies.
SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION
An ultrasonic sector scanner for producing a sector
scan in an object to be examined is described in which
one or more ultrasonic transducers are positioned to
direct ultrasonic waves toward the surface of one or
more movable re?ectors. The movable re?ectors tra
verse an arcuate path with respect to a stationary re?ec
tor which is positioned to receive the ultrasonic waves
scanning the surface of the stationary re?ector from
each of the movable re?ectors and converge such
waves at a point in front of the stationary re?ector. In a
preferred embodiment of the invention, the movable
re?ectors are mounted on a plate bearing a ring of
acoustically attenuating material and having apertures
4,185,501
5
or lenses therein proximate the movable re?ectors. The
plate is rotated in front of a transducer array in the
shape of a sector and two or more sets of the array
elements are pulsed sequentially to direct ultrasonic
waves through the apertures or lenses toward the sur
face of the movable re?ectors.
The novel features which are believed to be charac
teristic of the invention, both as to its organization and
its method of operation, together with further objects
and advantages thereof, will be better understood from
the following description in connection with the ac
companying drawings in which a presently preferred
embodiment of the invention is illustrated by way of
example. It is to be expressly understood, however, that
the drawings are for purposes of illustration and de
scription only and are not intended as a de?nition of the
limits of the invention.
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS
FIG. 1 is a front elevational view of a preferred em
bodiment of the present invention illustrating the sector
scan produced within the object to be examined;
FIG. 2 is a cross-sectional view of the present inven
tion taken along the line 2—2 of FIG. 1;
FIG. 3 is a cross-sectional view of the present inven
tion taken along the lines 3—-3 of FIG. 2;
FIG. 4 is a cross-sectional view of the present inven
tion taken along the lines 4-4 of FIG. 2;
FIG. 5 is a cross-sectional view of the present inven
tion taken along the lines 5-5 of FIG. 2; and
FIG. 6 is a cross-sectional view of an alternative
embodiment of the present invention taken along the
line 5—5 of FIG. 2.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE
INVENTION
Referring now to FIG. 1, a preferred embodiment of
the present invention is illustrated. The ultrasonic scan
ner 10 is shown having a sonolucent contact dome 12,
made for example of polyethylene which is placed in
contact with the surface 14 of the object to be exam
ined, such as the heart region of the human body. The
lower or face portion 16 of the scanner 10 is liquid ?lled
and houses the ultrasonic transducers, the movable and
stationary re?ectors and means for sensing the angular
position ofthe movable reflectors. The upper portion 18
of the scanner 10 houses the motor assembly which is
used to drive the movable re?ectors. A cable 20 pro
vides the electrical power for the various elements of
the scanner 10 and also transmits the acoustic pulsing
signals and motor control signals from a scanner con
sole, not shown, to the scanner l0, and the electrical
signal pulses from the transducers and the angle sensor
means back to the scanner console.
In operation, the ultrasonic waves 24 produced
within the scanner head 10 converge at a point 26 (the
scan center) near the interface 14 and then diverge to
produce the sector scan of beams 30 for the region to be
examined. The ultrasonic pulses within the beams 30 are
re?ected by the various portions of the heart region and
are received by the generating transducers and pro
cessed in accordance with the pulse-echo method de
scribed in the prior art literature referenced herein.
In FIGS. 2 through 5, the arrangement of the various
elements of the scanner 10 is shown. A transducer 32,
segmented into elements 320 to 322 in the shape of a
sector of a ring covering approximately 100°, is shown
mounted on a transducer plate 34. The transducer plate
t...0
M 5
40
45
65
6
34 has a shaft opening 36 in the center thereof and a seal
38 surrounding the shaft opening 36 and has mounted
therein the optical transducer element 40 of an angular
position sensor, such as an optical shaft encoder. Leads
42 are coupled to the optical transducer element 40 and
the scanner console and transmit power to element 40
and signals from element 40 to the scanner console.
Leads 44 are coupled to the transducer 32 and the scan
ner console and transmit acoustic pulsing signals from
the scanner console and signals from the transducer 32
to the scanner console.
A movable plate 46 is mounted below the transducer
plate 34 and is supported and driven by shaft 48
mounted in bearing block 50 attached to the transducer
plate 34. Motor 52, is controlled and energized through
leads 54 attached to the scanner console, and drives the
shaft 48 by means of belt 56. The movable plate 46 has
mounted on the outer edge thereof a plurality of acous
tical re?ectors 58 which are angularly positioned below
the plate 46 and has a plurality of apertures 60 therein
above the re?ectors 58. The re?ectors 58 and the aper
tures 60 are placed at regular intervals around the outer
edge of plate 46 and the apertures 60 have acoustic
lenses 62 therein made for example of polyethylene, for
focusing the ultrasonic waves produced by the trans
ducers 32 on to the re?ectors 58. The plate 46 has an
attenuating layer 64 of ultrasound absorbing material,
such as a loaded epoxy, attached thereto to absorb the
ultrasonic waves from the transducers 32 which do not
pass through the apertures 58. A plurality of strips 66 of
alternately (optically) re?ective and non-re?ective ma
terial are placed on the plate 46 below the optical trans
ducer portion 40 for use in the sensing of the angular
position of the shaft 48 and together with the optical
transducer portion 40 form a conventional optical shaft
encoder. A stationary acoustical re?ector 68 mounted
on a block 70 of attenuating material, such as low den
sity polyethylene, attached to the inner surface of the
lower portion 16, is positioned to receive the ultrasonic
waves re?ected by the movable re?ectors 58 and to
direct such ultrasonic waves through the contact dome
12 and into the object to be examined. The movable
re?ectors 58 and the stationary re?ector 68 are placed
at a 45° dihedral angle with the plane of plate 46 and
may be composed of thin sheets of metal. If the station
ary re?ector 68 is made of a very thin sheet of metal,
such as a 50;). thick sheet of brass, the stationary re?ec
tor 68 will be partially re?ecting and spurious multiple
re?ections or echo artifacts will be attenuated by the
block 70. In operation, the plate 46 rotates about the axis
of the shaft 48 with its angular position with respect to
the symmetry plane of the scanner 10, i.e. the plane
which is orthogonal to the plane of the transducer plate
34 and contains the line which bisects the transducer 32,
being monitored by the optical shaft encoder. At any
given time, one of the lenses 62 and corresponding
mirror 58 is positioned in front of the transducer 32. In
atypical embodiment, the lens apertures subtend an
angle of approximately 20° at the scanner axis (i.e. the
axis of the shaft 48), whereas each transducer element
32a to 32d also subtends an angle of 20° so that as the
plate 46 rotates, the aperture of the lens 62 is filled by at
most two elements of the transducer 32. As each of the
pairs of the lens 62 and the re?ectors 58 pass over the
transducer 32, those two transducer elements which fill
the aperture of the lens 62, starting with elements 320
and 32!), then 32b and 320, etc. (the active elements), are
energized to produce a series of acoustic pulses which
4,185,501
7
travel through the lens 62 to the movable re?ector 58,
are scanned across the stationary re?ector 68 by the
movable re?ectors 58, are re?ected by the stationary
re?ector 68 through the dome 12 into the object to be
examined, are partially re?ected back by portions of the
object and return along the same path ofthat same set of
active elements of the transducer 32, and are detected
and displayed according to known art. As the plate 46
rotates, those elements of transducer 32 which are to be
active elements are selected by appropriate switching
circuitry within the scanner 10 so as to track the lens
re?ector combination, the angular information being
provided by the optical shaft encoder. The energizing
of the transducer elements 320 to 32d is timed so that
element 32a is energized when the lens aperture center
is at the element centerline, and element 322 ceases
being energized when the lens aperture center is at the
element centerline, thus providing an 80° sector scan.
The acoustic beam pattern resulting from operation of
the transducer 32 in this fashion is substantially identical
to that obtained with a transducer of the same diameter
and shape as the lens aperature, if the re?ectors 58 are
made suf?ciently large to intercept essentially the entire
(i.e. the main lobe) of the beam exiting through the lens
62. Furthermore, the focusing of the system can be
achieved by means of the lens/re?ector combination so
that a different focus may be achieved by replacing such
elements. Similarly, the effective aperture of the trans
ducer 32 and the aperture shape may be selected by
appropriate selection of the lenses 62 and re?ectors 58.
In addition, large and small lenses can be provided in
plate 46, so as to provide within the same scanner the
option of a large aperture transducer to provide ?ne
focusing and poor depth of the ?eld and a small aper
ture scanner to provide greater depth of ?eld but with a
relatively poorer resolution at the focus. In the same
.manner, the focal lengths of the lenses may be varied
from lens to lens. In the preferred embodiment, a focus
ing lens 62 is chosen with a plane re?ector 58. Alterna
tively, the lens 62 may be a ?at plate, or even an open
aperture, and the re?ector 58 a concave focusing re?ec
tor. Finally, both the lens 62 and the re?ector 58 may be
focusing elements so that a compound lens is in effect
used for focusing.
The choice of the number of elements in the trans
ducer 32 is selected as a compromise between the objec
tives of minimizing the amount of acoustic energy lost
in the attenuating layer 64 of the plate 46 and the
amount of unwanted stray radiation and minimizing the
number of transducer elements so as to minimize system
complexity. For minimum complexity a single trans
ducer 32 can be used. In the preferred embodiment, the
transducer elements subtend an angle approximately
equal to that subtended by the aperture of the lens 62, so
that two elements need be activated at one time and ?ve
elements suffice for the transducer 32 to provide an 80°
sector scan. If elements subtending just over half the
angle subtended by the lens aperture were used, then
ten elements, activated three at a time, would be re
quired to provide an 85° sector scan, and the acoustic
utilization ef?cienty would increase from approxi
mately one half to approximately two thirds, since the
active transducer area would be reduced from about
twice the aperture area to one and a half times that area.
As described in the prior art, instrument related echo
artifacts can degrade the imaging capabilities of current
ultrasonic scanners. Various means of reducing such
artifacts are described in our copending, Ser. No.
5
0
5
25
45
50
65
8
833,244, ?led Sept. 14, 1977, and assigned to the same
assignee as the present invention. In the present inven
tion such artifacts can be further reduced by the use of
acoustic lenses 62 made of an acoustically attenuating
material, such as polyethylene. The use of such a mate
rial for the lens 62 will reduce those echo artifacts
which result from the re?ections of the acoustic return
pulses from the face of the transducer 32.
In FIG. 6, an alternative embodiment of the present
scanner is illustrated. The lens and re?ector pairs 62’,
58’ are mounted on plate 46 at 45° intervals, rather than
90° intervals. In this embodiment, two lens and re?ector
pairs are in front of the transducer 32 at one time, and
two pairs of transducer elements are energized at one
time to provide simultaneously two lines of information
for the sector scan. This doubling in the information
rate can be used either to double the line density in the
sector, while keeping the frame rate constant or to dou
ble the frame rate, while keeping the line density con
stant. Since the active beams at any given time are angu
larly spaced 45° apart and since the angular beam width
is only a few degrees, there will be very little cross talk
between the beams, i.e. acoustic energy from one beam
being received in the other. In those cases, however,
where, because of re?ections from structures within the
patient, such cross talk (which results in artifactual
echoes) is signi?cant, only one set of elements need be
activated at one time, resulting in either a conventional
single beam 90° scan or in a conventional 45° scan,
depending on the pulsing sequence adopted for the
elements.
Having described the invention, it is obvious that
numerous modi?cations and departures may be made
by those skilled in the art; thus the invention is to be
construed as limited only to the spirit and scope of the
appended claims.
We claim:
1. An ultrasonic sector scanner comprising:
a housing;
one or more movable re?ector means positioned
within said housing;
one or more ultrasonic transducer means mounted
within said housing and positioned to direct ultra
sonic waves toward the surface of said movable
re?ector means;
means for conducting said ultrasonic waves;
stationary re?ector means mounted within said hous
ing and positioned to receive ultrasonic waves
re?ected from said movable re?ector means; and
support means for supporting said movable re?ector
means, and for causing said movable re?ector
means to traverse and arcuate path with respect to
said stationary re?ector means whereby said ultra
sonic waves scan across said stationary re?ector
means and are re?ected to converge at a point a
preselected distance in front of said stationary re
?ector means.
2. The scanner of claim 1 wherein said support means
has a circular outer edge, said movable re?ector means
being coupled to said outer edge thereof and extending
below and inward of said outer edge and said trans
ducer means being mounted above and inward of said
outer edge and above said movable re?ector means, said
movable re?ector means being angularly positioned to
direct said ultrasonic waves radially inward.
3. The scanner of claim 2 wherein said transducer
means is con?gured in the shape of a sector.
4,185,501
9
4. The scanner of claim 3 wherein said transducer
means comprises a plurality of adjacent transducer ele
ments, said elements being sequentially energized.
5. The scanner of claim 4 wherein said elements are
energized in adjacent pairs.
6. The scanner of claim 3 wherein said transducer
means comprises a plurality of adjacent elements and
said elements are adapted to be energized independently
to provide two beams of ultrasonic waves.
_7. The scanner of claim 2 wherein said stationary
reflector means is disposed inside of said movable re
?ector means and angularly positioned to re?ect ultra
sonic waves from said movable re?ector means and to
converge said waves at a point outside of said housing.
8. The scanner of claim 2 wherein said support means
comprises a circular ring and driving means coupled to
said ring to rotate said ring.
9. The scanner of claim 2 wherein said support means
comprises a circular plate having one or more apertures
therein proximate to said movable re?ector means to
permit said ultrasonic waves to pass through said plate
and strike said movable re?ector means and driving
means coupled to said plate to rotate said plate.
10. The scanner of claim 9 further comprising an
acoustic lens positioned in each of said apertures to
15
20
25
30
35
45
55
65
10
focus said ultrasonic waves onto said movable re?ector
means.
11. The scanner of claim 9 wherein said acoustic lens
consists of an acoustically attenuating material.
12. The scanner of claim 9 further comprising attenu
ating means coupled to said plate and positioned to
absorb ultrasonic waves striking the surface of said
plate.
13. The scanner of claim 1 further comprising means
for determining the angular position of said movable
re?ector means.
14. The scanner of claim 1 wherein said means for
conducting said ultrasonic waves is a ?uid.
15. The scanner of claim 1 wherein housing includes
a sonolucent contact dome to transmit said ultrasonic
waves to an object to be scanned.
16. The scanner of claim 1 wherein said stationary
re?ector means is adapted to partially re?ect said ultra
sonic waves.
17. The scanner of claim 16 wherein said stationary
re?ector means has an absorbing block coupled thereto
for absorbing the ultrasonic waves passing through said
stationary re?ector means.
I‘ i 1 i i
