United States Patent [191
Naumann, Jr. et a1.
[54]
[75]
[73]
[21]
[22]
[51]
[52]
[58]
[56]
ULTRASONIC SECTOR SCANNER
UTILIZING ROTATING TRANSDUCER
Inventors: Ted F. Naumann, Jr., Shingle
Springs; Ronald C. Carnes, Folsom,
both of Calif.
General Electric Company, Rancho
Cordova, Calif.
Appl. No.: 290,838
Filed: Aug. 7, 1981
Int. Cl.3 ............................................. G01N 29/04
US. Cl. ‘73/639
Field of Search .................. 73/625, 641, 639, 628
References Cited
U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS
3,817,089 6/1974 Eggleton et a1. ................. 73/625 X
Assignee:
[11] 4,453,409
[45] Jun. 12, 1984
4,102,204 7/1978 Kretz ................................ 73/639 X
4,143,554 3/1979 Nagy et a1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 73/641
4,149,419 4/1979 Connell, Jr. et a1. 73/639
4,185,501 1/1980 Proudian et al. . . .. . .. .. 73/641
4,228,687 10/1980 Fraser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., 73/641 X
4,232,556 11/1980
4,289,025 9/1981
Primary Examiner-Anthony V. Ciarlante
Attorney, Agent, or Firm-Flehr, Hohbach, Test,
Albritton & Herbert
[57] ABSTRACT
An ultrasonic sector scanner which utilizes rotating
transducers uses an optical encoder for generating in
dexing signals. A slip-ring and brush assembly intercon
Cole ....... ..
- nects the transducers and electronic circuitry within the
scanner.
3 Claims, 4 Drawing Figures
4,453,409
‘Sheet 1 of 2
US. Patent Jun. 12, 1984
U.S. Patent Jun. 12, 1984 Sheet 2 of2 4,453,409
ELECTRONICS
FlG.-—4
4,453,409
1
ULTRASONIC SECTOR SCANNER UTILIZING
ROTATING TRANSDUCER
This invention relates generally to ultrasonic scan
ners such as used for medical diagnostic purposes, and
more particularly the invention relates to an ultrasonic
sector scanner in which a plurality of rotating transduc
ers are selectively energized for scanning.
Ultrasonic diagnostic systems are known and com
mercially available for diagnostic purposes. See for
example US. Pat. No. 4,172,386 for “Video A Trace
Display System for Ultrasonic Diagnostic System” and
US. Pat. No. 4,204,433 for “Computerized Ultrasonic
Scanner With Technique Select”. The commercially
available Datason ultrasound system of General Elec
tric Company provides both real time and static images
on a television display.
Brie?y, such systems utilize sound transducers to
transmit ultrasonic (e.g. on the order of several mega
hertz) waves into a patient and to receive echo signals.
In one mode of operation, the transducer is attached to
a ‘plurality of hinged arms for movement in a single
plane, and potentiometers associated with the hinged
arms produce signals which identify the transducer
position. Alternatively, a transducer array or a hand
held transducer can be used. The echo signals are ap
plied to a time gain compensated ampli?er to adjust the
echo signals for attenuation in passing through the pa
tient. The adjusted signals are then passed through an
analog to digital conversion and video processing cir
cuitry and thence to scan converter circuitry for display
formatting. The display comprises a plurality of pixels
in horizontal rows and vertical columns with each pixel
having a brightness level in response to the input signal.
conventionally, the brightness is de?ned by a 32 level
Gray-scale, hence the pixel brightness level requires a
?ve bit digital code. v
The hand-held unit or sector scanner can utilize a
phased transducer array, an oscillating transducer, or a
rotating transducer array. The phased array offers a
high sample rate but is more expensive that the compa
rable designs. The oscillating transducer is a simple
design and relatively compact. However, the oscillating
transducer has a variable speed, thus uneven line spac
ing and typically a small sector angle. The rotating
transducer array offers uniform transducer speed and a
wider sector angle than does the oscillating transducer.
However, the transducers must be accurately activated
in time sequence. Heretofore, the position and orienta
tion requirements have necessitated tightly controlled
piece part tolerances and assembly tooling. This has
resulted in expensive parts, high rejection rates, and
restricted serviceability.
Accordingly, an object of the present invention is an
improved sector scanner utilizing rotating transducers.
Another object of the invention is a sector scanner
utilizing rotating transducers which are reliably cou
pled to electronic circuitry of the scanner.
Still another object of the invention is timing means
integral with the rotating transducers for accurately
controlling each transducer in proper sequence.
Yet another object ofthe invention is a sector scanner
which is lower in cost and has increased serviceability.
A feature of the invention is a slip ring and brush
assembly for electrically coupling the rotating transduc
ers to electronic circuitry.
15
25
35
45
50
55
65
2
Another feature of the invention is optical indexing
means integral with the slip ring assembly for providing
a timing index for the sector scanner. ‘
Brie?y, an ultrasonic sector scanner in accordance
with the invention includes a housing, a shaft rotatably
mounted in the housing, and a motor mounted within
the housing and coupled to rotate the shaft. A trans
ducer support wheel is coupled to the shaft for rotating
a plurality of transducers, and electronic circuitry is
mounted within the housing for controlling the trans
ducers in processing electrical signals therefrom. Means
is provided for electrically connecting the electronic
circuitry and the transducer means including a plurality
of slip-rings positioned on the shaft and a plurality of
brushes which engage the plurality of slip-rings. First
conductive means electrically interconnects the brushes
and the electronic circuitry, and second conductive
means interconnects the slip-rings and transducers.
More particularly, the brushes are mounted to and
~ comprise a part of a support block which is mounted
within the housing in association with the slip rings. In
accordance with another feature of the invention an
optical emitter and an optical detector are mounted in
spaced alignment in the brush support block. A discv
having a notch in a peripheral portion is mounted on the
shaft with the disc passing between the optical emitter
and the optical detector whereby a signal is generated
by the optical detector in- response to light passage
through the notch. Thus, a timing index signal properly
coordinated with the position of the rotating transduc
ers is generated and provided to the electronic control
circuitry. '
The invention and objects and features thereofwill be
more readily apparent from the following detailed de
scription and appended claims when taken with the
drawing, in which:
FIG. 1 is'a perspective view of an ultrasonic sector
scanner.
FIG. 2 is a second view of the sector scanner of FIG.
1 in accordance with one embodiment of the present
invention.
FIG. 3 is a plan view of a slip-ring and brush assem
bly and optical indexing means in accordance with one
embodiment of the invention.
FIG. 4 is a side view of the slip-ring brush assembly
of FIG. 3 taken along the line 4-4.
Referring to the drawings, FIG. 1 is a perspective
view of an ultrasonic sector scanner which includes a
housing 10 of suitable con?guration for manual support
by an operator. Housing 10 is enlarged at the end por
tion 12 to accommodate a rotating transducer assembly
as will be described further hereinbelow. Ports 14 and
16 provide for the transmission of ultrasonic energy
from the transducers within the housing portion 12 and
a patient undergoing examination. Signals received by
the transducers are passed through internal electronics
within housing 10 and through cable 18 to external
computer means (not shown) for processing and dis
play .
FIG. 2 is a section view of the sector scanner of FIG.
1 with features in accordance with the present inven
tion. Mounted within housing 10 is an electric motor 20
which rotates a hollow shaft 22. Rotatably mounted on
shaft 22 within the housing portion 12 is a transducer
assembly shown generally at 24. The transducer assem
bly includes a plurality of transducers (e.g. four) which
~are selectively actuated to transmit ultrasound energy
through the ports 14 and 16 through use of the acoustic
4,453,409
3
mirrors 26, 28, and 30. Use of such acoustic mirrors is
well known in the art and does not comprise part of the
present invention. The transducer assembly is further
described in copending application Ser. No. 290,830
?led Aug. 7, 1981, now U.S. Pat. No. 4,402,223 for.
Ultrasonic Sector Scanner Utilizing Rotating Transduc
ers.
Connected to the cable 18 is an electronic assembly
32 for controlling the transducer array and for process
ing electrical signals from the transducer array. In ac
cordance with a feature of the present invention the
electronic circuitry shown generally at 32 is electrically
interconnected with the transducer array through
means of a plurality of brushes shown generally at 34
which are mounted in a brush block assembly 36 and
which electrically and physically engage slip-rings 38
mounted on the rotating shaft 22. Conductive cable
within the shaft 22 electrically interconnects the slip
rings 38 and the transducers, and conductive means
interconnects the brushes 34 and the circuitry 32.
An indexing signal for identifying the position of the
transducer assembly 24 is provided to the electronic
control circuitry 32 by electro-optical means including
an optical transmitter 40 such as light emitting diode
and an optical detector 42 which are mounted in spaced
alignment in the brush block assembly 36. Mounted on
shaft 22 is an indexing disc 44 the periphery of which
passes between the electro-optical transmitter 40 and
detector 42. A notch 46 is provided in a peripheral
portion of the disc 44 whereby the transmission of light
through the notch from transmitter 40 to detector 42
causes detector 42 to generate an electrical index signal
that is transmitted to the circuitry 32. Thus, by physi-‘
cally positioning the disc 44 and notch 46 on shaft 22 in
proper alignment with the transducer assembly 24, the
indexing signal from optical detector 42 provides a
necessary timing reference for the control circuitry 32.
FIGS. 3 and 4 are more detailed drawings of the
brush support block 36 and slip-rings ofthe embodiment
of FIG. 2. The electronic circuitry 32 is interconnected
by the conductors 50 the brushes 34 which are suitably
mounted such as by molding in the support block 36.
The indexing disc 44 is integral with bushing 54 about
which the slip-rings 38 are mounted. Electrical conduc
tors 56 are positioned within the hollow shaft 22 and
electrically connect the slip-rings 38 and the transducer
assembly. .
As shown in the side view of FIG. 4, each brush 38 is
preferably U shaped with both legs of the brush engag
ing a slip-ring 38 on opposing sides. The brush support
. block 36 may be mounted to the underside of a printed
circuit board for the electronics 32 by fastener means
extending through the holes 60 and 62.
The brush block assembly, slip-rings, and the index
ing means are relatively simple in design, and the parts
are readily assembled and calibrated with respect to the
transducer assembly. Thus, the ultrasonic sector scan
ner embodying the invention is less expensive and
readily serviceable.
While the invention has been described with refer
ence to a speci?c embodiment, the description is illus
trative of the inventiion and is not to be construed as
limiting the invention. Various modi?cations and appli
cations may occur to those skilled in the art without
departing from the true spirit and scope of the invention
as de?ned by the appended claims.
5
25
35
40
45
65
4
What is claimed is:
1. A hand-held ultrasonic sector scanner comprising
a housing having a handle portion and a separated
end portion, .
a hollow shaft rotatably mounted in saidhandle por
tion and said end portion of said housing,
a motor mounted within said handle portion of said
housing axially aligned with said shaft and coupled
to rotate said shaft,
a transducer support wheel in said end portion and
including a plurality of transducers, said wheel
being axially aligned with and coupled to said shaft
for rotating said plurality of transducers,
electronic circuitry mounted within said handle por
tion ofsaid housing for controlling said transducers
and processing electrical signals therefrom, A
means for electrically conducting said electronic cir
cuitry and said transducers including a bushing
mounted on said shaft within said handle portion
and a plurality of slip-rings on said bushing and
spaced along said shaft and a plurality of brushes
engaging said plurality of slip-rings, each slip-ring
being continuous, ?rst conductive means electri
cally interconnecting said brushes and said elec
tronic circuitry and second conductive means ex
tending through said hollow shaft and electrically
interconnecting said slip-rings and said transduc
ers,
a brush support block mounted to said housing in
association with said slip-rings, and
optical indexing means within said handle portion and
including an optical emitter and an optical detector
mounted in spaced alignment in said brush support
assembly, a disc integral with said bushing
mounted on said shaft, said disc having a notch in a
peripheral portion, said disc passing between said
optical emitter and said optical detector whereby
an index signal is generated by said optical detector
in response to light passing through said notch.
2. In a hand-held ultrasonic sector scanner including
a housing having a handle portion and a scanner por
tion, a rotatable shaft in said housing, a plurality of
transducers mounted on said shaft in said scanner por
tion, and electronic circuitry mounted within said han
dle portion of said housing, conductive means for elec
trically connecting said transducers with said electronic
circuitry comprising a bushing with a plurality of slip
rings mounted on said shaft in said handle portion, each '
slip-ring being continuous, a brush support block in
cluding a plurality of brushes mounted in said handle
portion of said housing with said plurality of brushes
engaging said plurality of slip-rings, ?rst conductive
means electrically interconnecting said brushes and the
electronic circuitry, second conductive means electri
cally interconnecting said slip-rings and said transduc
ers, and an optical emitter and an optical detector
mounted in spaced alignment in said brush support
block, a disc integral with said bushing mounted on said
shaft, said disc having a; notch in a peripheral portion,
said disc passing between said emitter and said optical
detector whereby an index signal is generated by said
optical detector in response to light passing through
said notch.
3. Conductive means as de?ned by claim 2 wherein
the shaft is hollow and said second conductive means
extends through said shaft.
4‘ * 1' * i
UNITED STATES PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE
CERTIFICATE OF QRRECTKON
PATENT NO. 1 4,453,409
DATED 3 June 12, 1984
INVENTQR(5) 1 Ted F. Naumann, Jr.
It is certi?ed thataerir r t?e' algceelli?eiti?ed patent and that said Letters Patent
is hereby corrected as shown below:
Col. 1, line 43 delete "that" and substitute tl'ilerefor -—than===-;
Col. 3, line 41 after "50" insert -—to--;
C01. 4, line 17 delete "conducting" and substitute therefor
—-connecting—-; and
Col. 4, line 59 delete "a;" and subtitute therefor --a—-l.
Signed and §caied this
Sixth Day Of November 1984
~- [SEAL]
Attest:
GERALD J. MOSSINGHOFF
Arresting Officer Commissioner ofPatents and Trademarks
